Scalable Analytics on Multi-Streams Dynamic Graphs
Muhammad Ghufran Khan

To cite this version:

Muhammad Ghufran Khan. Scalable Analytics on Multi-Streams Dynamic Graphs. BDA 2022 -
38ème Conférence sur la Gestion de Données – Principes, Technologies et Applications, Oct 2022,
Clermont-Ferrand, France. ￿hal-03903287￿

HAL Id: hal-03903287

https://inria.hal.science/hal-03903287

Submitted on 16 Dec 2022

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

Scalable Analytics on Multi-Streams Dynamic Graphs

Muhammad Ghufran Khan
Inria & Institut Polytechnique de Paris
Palaiseau, France
muhammad.khan@inria.fr

ABSTRACT
Several real-time applications rely on dynamic graphs to model
and store data arriving from multiple streams. In addition to the
high ingestion rate, the storage and query execution challenges
are amplified in contexts where consistency should be considered
when storing and querying the data. This Ph.D. thesis addresses the
challenges associated with multi-stream dynamic graph analytics.
We propose a database design that can provide scalable storage
and indexing, to support consistent read-only analytical queries
(present and historical), in the presence of real-time dynamic graph
updates that arrive continuously from multiple streams.

KEYWORDS
Dynamic graph, read-only present and historical queries, multi-
stream graph processing

1 INTRODUCTION
Dynamic graphs are omnipresent in the context of real-time appli-
cations that generate massive amounts of events. These events can
be seen as high-velocity data stream, whose timely analysis is criti-
cal for applications such as monitoring of cyber attacks in system
security applications [10], fraud detection in financial institutions
[10], anomaly detection in computer networks [3] and many more.
This PhD thesis considers the above-mentioned real-time use
cases. We consider a database modeled as a labeled property graph
(LPG), that is continuously updated. Updates may arrive from mul-
tiple streams, creating a need for appropriate transaction support,
in order to avoid inconsistencies; on such graph, we must be able
to answer analytical queries about the current graph, as well as
historical queries. In this short paper, we present the challenges
(Section 2), outline the approach we investigate (Section 3) and
finally related work (Section 4) before concluding (Section 5).

2 CHALLENGES
In our problem setting, we focus on systems that can continuously
ingest temporal labeled property graph (LPG) updates from multi-
ple streams while at the same time supporting a diverse set graph
analytic queries with clear consistency guarantees. We consider
complex scenarios where graph updates are generated from mul-
tiple streams; updates from a given stream may arrive later due
to any kind of transmission delay, leading to out-of-order [1] up-
dates, which may lead to consistency issues. Figure 1 exemplifies a
sequence of updates labeled A to E, considering the update genera-
tion time (the time when the update is generated from the source
machine) 𝑉𝑇 , with update B arriving out of order (after D). After

BDA 2022, October 24–27, 2022, Clermont-Ferrand, France
2022. ACM ISBN 978-x-xxxx-xxxx-x/YY/MM. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn

Figure 1: Example scenario for out-of-order update
the first three received updates have been ingested, that is, reflected
on the database state, query Q arrives and requires two iterations
on the updates ingested up to that time. In the first iteration, the
query 𝑄𝑖 computes on the updates (A, C, and D), and before starting
the second iteration 𝑄 (𝑖+1) , the delayed update B arrives and may
thus be reflected in the computed query results. This may lead to
an inconsistency, since B was not reflected in the first part of Q’s
evaluation.

There are several challenges associated with multi-stream dy-

namic graph analytics listed below:

• C1: How to enable data ingestion from multiple streams and

diverse set of consistent graph analytics in parallel?

• C2: How to efficiently query the present and historical graph

updates of the system?

• C3: How to store both topological and properties updates of

the graph?

• C4: How to provide consistency guarantee in presence of

out-of-order [1] updates?

Several works [2, 3, 5, 7, 10] have been published in the past to
address partially the challenges described above; we discuss them
in detail in Section 4.

3 APPROACH
The objective of this PhD thesis is to devise a scalable system that
can answer analytical queries (present, historical) over dynamic
graphs, updated multiple streams, whose updates may arrive out-
of-order.

The strategy we take in my PhD project to address the challenges

listed in Section 2 is as follows:

• We maintain a write data store, which is the recipient of all
write operations. It supports a multi-version concurrency
control (MVCC) [9] protocol, in which temporal graph up-
dates from multiple streams are considered write-only trans-
actions, and analytical queries (present and historical) are
executed as read-only transactions. This ensures consistent
graph analytic even in the presence of out-of-order updates,
addressing challenges C1 and C4.

• We explore time-based indexing techniques [4, 6] in order
to design an effcient read store, the default recipient of all

BDA 2022, October 24–27, 2022, Clermont-Ferrand, France

Ghufran Khan

State-of-the-art Present/History query Topological/Attribute Out-of-order update

Llama
GraphOne
LiveGraph
Teseo
Tegra
This Thesis

YES/NO
YES/NO
YES/NO
YES/NO
YES/YES
YES/YES

YES/YES
YES/NO
YES/YES
YES/NO
YES/YES
YES/YES

NO
NO
NO
NO
NO
YES

Table 1: Comparison of state-of-the-art systems in the context of our dynamic graph challenges.

read-only transactions, on top of the write store. The read
store allows efficient processing of analytical point and in-
terval queries (both present and historical), thus addressing
challenge C2. Data brought by updates in the write-store is
periodically moved to the read-store to make it available for
queries.

• To address challenge C3, we design the system in such a way
that the storage of the topological graph updates is decoupled
from the storage of graph properties updates. Keeping them
separate allows us to optimize data access paths separately
for these two largely orthogonal components of the property
graph.

Currently, we are in a design phase, considering the data struc-

tures that can best fit our system requirements.

4 RELATED WORK
Existing systems that support multi-stream dynamic graph ana-
lytics are classified into two main categories: a) the systems that
compute continuous results of pre-registered, fixed queries, such
as path queries, over dynamic graphs; an example is [8]; b) systems
that enable the evaluation of ad-hoc analytic queries on top of dy-
namic graphs; these include Llama [7], Teseo [5], LiveGraph [10],
Tegra [2]. GraphOne [3] appears as a hybrid between the two, as
it provides a hybrid store that supports both real-time and batch
analytic queries.

Our work is closely related to the group b), and Table 1 sum-
marizes the challenges associated with these systems. Llama [7] is
a graph analytics system using multi-version arrays that support
snapshot isolation. Other systems that provide snapshot isolation
are GraphOne [3] and Tegra [2]. GraphOne utilizes a multi-version
degree array and Tegra uses persistent adaptive radix trees (PART)
to maintain different snapshot versions. Mission critical applica-
tions, such as banking applications, need transactional guarantees
while ingesting updates in dynamic graph; Teseo [5] and LiveGraph
[10] were designed to address such requirements. The fat tree (B+
tree together with a sparse array) data structure is used in Teseo
to ingest structural updates to the graph; LiveGraph [10] uses a
transaction edge log and vertex blocks to support updates to labeled
properties graph. Both systems use multi-version concurrency con-
trol (MVCC) [9] protocol to maintain data consistency.

All the systems mentioned in Table 1, as well as the one we
aim for, support queries based on the current state of the dynamic
graph. Except for Tegra [2] and this thesis, no other system supports
historical state queries. This thesis, LiveGraph [10], Llama [7], and
Tegra [2], support both topological and attribute updates. Existing

systems do not provide consistency guarantees in the presence of
out-of-order updates, while we aim to attain this goal as explained
above. A position paper appeared [1] on the topic of bitemporal
dynamic graph analytics, that addresses all the challenges that are
described in Table 1, as we do. However, there is no follow-up
published.

5 CONCLUSION AND PERSPECTIVES
This PHD thesis aims to provide a scalable storage and indexing
solution that can ingest real-time graph updates from multiple
streams and, on top of that, provide consistent graph analytics
(read-only present and historical queries) even in the presence of
out-of-order updates. In the near future, we should finalize the
choice of data structures for our system design, and implement it
to provide a comprehensive proof-of-concept system.

Thesis context
My PhD started in October 2021, and my PhD advisers are Ioana
Manolescu and Angelos Anadiotis.
Acknowledgments. This work is funded by AI Chair SourcesSay
project (ANR-20-CHIA-0015) grants.

REFERENCES
[1] Hassan Halawa and Matei Ripeanu. 2021. Position Paper: Bitemporal Dynamic

Graph Analytics (GRADES-NDA ’21).

[2] Anand Padmanabha Iyer, Qifan Pu, Kishan Patel, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion
Stoica. 2021. TEGRA: Efficient Ad-Hoc Analytics on Evolving Graphs. In 18th
USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 21).
USENIX Association, 337–355.

[3] Pradeep Kumar and H. Howie Huang. 2019. GraphOne: A Data Store for Real-
time Analytics on Evolving Graphs. In 17th USENIX Conference on File and Storage
Technologies (FAST 19). USENIX Association, Boston, MA, 249–263.

[4] Viktor Leis, Alfons Kemper, and Thomas Neumann. 2013. The adaptive radix

tree: ARTful indexing for main-memory databases. In 2013 ICDE. 38–49.

[5] Dean De Leo and Peter A. Boncz. 2021. Teseo and the Analysis of Structural

Dynamic Graphs. Proc. VLDB Endow. 14 (2021), 1053–1066.

[6] Siqiang Luo, Subarna Chatterjee, Rafael Ketsetsidis, Niv Dayan, Wilson Qin, and
Stratos Idreos. 2020. Rosetta: A Robust Space-Time Optimized Range Filter for
Key-Value Stores. Proceedings of the 2020 ACM SIGMOD International Conference
on Management of Data (2020).

[7] Peter Macko, Virendra J. Marathe, Daniel W. Margo, and Margo I. Seltzer. 2015.
LLAMA: Efficient graph analytics using Large Multiversioned Arrays. In 2015
IEEE 31st International Conference on Data Engineering. 363–374.

[8] Anil Pacaci, Angela Bonifati, and M. Tamer Özsu. 2022. Evaluating Complex
In Proceedings of the 38th IEEE International

Queries on Streaming Graphs.
Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE) (2022).

[9] Yingjun Wu, Joy Arulraj, Jiexi Lin, Ran Xian, and Andrew Pavlo. 2017. An em-
pirical evaluation of in-memory multi-version concurrency control. Proceedings
of the VLDB Endowment 10 (03 2017), 781–792.

[10] Xiaowei Zhu, Guanyu Feng, Marco Serafini, Xiaosong Ma, Jiping Yu, Lei Xie,
Ashraf Aboulnaga, and Wenguang Chen. 2020. LiveGraph: a transactional graph
storage system with purely sequential adjacency list scans. Proceedings of the
VLDB Endowment 13 (03 2020), 1020–1034.

