RDF graph summarization: principles, techniques and
applications (tutorial)
Haridimos Kondylakis, Dimitris Kotzinos, Ioana Manolescu

To cite this version:

Haridimos Kondylakis, Dimitris Kotzinos, Ioana Manolescu. RDF graph summarization: principles,
techniques and applications (tutorial). EDBT/ICDT 2019 - 22nd International Conference on Ex-
tending Database Technology - Joint Conference, Mar 2019, Lisbonne, Portugal. ￿hal-02081474￿

HAL Id: hal-02081474

https://inria.hal.science/hal-02081474

Submitted on 27 Mar 2019

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

RDF graph summarization:
principles, techniques and applications

Haridimos Kondylakis
Institute Of Computer Science,
FORTH
Heraklion, Greece
kondylak@ics.forth.gr

Dimitris Kotzinos
Lab. ETIS UMR 8051, University of
Paris-Seine, University of
Cergy-Pontoise, ENSEA, CNRS
Pontoise, France
Dimitrios.Kotzinos@u-cergy.fr

Ioana Manolescu
Inria and LIX (UMR 7161, CNRS and
Ecole polytechnique)
Palaiseau, France
ioana.manolescu@inria.fr

ABSTRACT
The explosion in the amount of the RDF on the Web has lead
to the need to explore, query and understand such data sources.
The task is challenging due to the complex and heterogeneous
structure of RDF graphs which, unlike relational databases, do
not come with a structure-dictating schema. Summarization has
been applied to RDF data to facilitate these tasks. Its purpose is to
extract concise and meaningful information from RDF knowledge
bases, representing their content as faithfully as possible. There
is no single concept of RDF summary, and not a single but many
approaches to build such summaries; the summarization goal,
and the main computational tools employed for summarizing
graphs, are the main factors behind this diversity.

This tutorial presents a structured analysis and comparison
existing works in the area of RDF summarization; it is based
upon a recent survey which we co-authored with colleagues [3].
We present the concepts at the core of each approach, outline
their main technical aspects and implementation. We conclude
by identifying the most pertinent summarization method for
different usage scenarios, and discussing areas where future effort
is needed.

1 INTRODUCTION
The explosion in the amount of the RDF on the Web has lead
to the need to explore, query and understand such data sources.
This need arises both for computer scientists and for scientists
and practitioners in the many areas where Open Data is produced
- ranging from agriculture to education, from cultural artefacts
to criminality statistics. All users who need to tame, understand
and analyze such complex RDF graphs are faced with several
challenges.

Firstly, RDF graphs are often large compared with the human
ability to understand and analyze them; even a “tiny” graph of e.g.
10.000 nodes is challenging for humans to comprehend. Secondly,
unlike relational databases which come equipped with a prescrip-
tive schema, RDF graphs lack regular structure or many times
this structure exists but is unknown. Thirdly, size of the is chal-
lenging both for humans and for automated data processing tools.
Fourthly, while RDF graphs may come equipped with ontologies,
which specify the known relationships between the properties
and classes present in the graph, the ontology itself is sometimes
a source of complexity, especially if it is very large. In the pres-
ence of ontologies, graphs may contain implicit information, i.e.
facts that hold in the graph despite not being physically present
there. Reflecting the implicit facts of the ontology is in itself a

© 2019 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Published in Proceedings of the
22nd International Conference on Extending Database Technology (EDBT), March
26-29, 2019, ISBN XXX-X-XXXXX-XXX-X on OpenProceedings.org.
Distribution of this paper is permitted under the terms of the Creative Commons
license CC-by-nc-nd 4.0.

challenge. Additionally specific parts of the ontology might not
be used at all or very little in the specific Knowledge Base (KB).
Summarization has been applied to RDF data to facilitate these
tasks. Its purpose is to extract concise and meaningful informa-
tion from RDF knowledge bases, representing their content as
faithfully as possible. There is no single concept of RDF summary,
and not a single but many approaches to build such summaries.
Summarizing semantic graphs is a multifaceted problem with
many dimensions, and thus many algorithms, methods and ap-
proaches have been developed to cope with it. As a result, there is
now a confusion in the research community about the terminol-
ogy in the area, further increased by the fact that certain terms
are often used with different meanings in the relevant literature,
denoting similar, but not identical research directions or concepts.
We believe that this lack of terminology and classification hinders
scientific development in this area.

Following up on a recent survey which we co-authored with
colleagues [3], in this tutorial we present the main conceptual
tools behind graph summarization, including some techniques
developed prior to the advent of RDF, and show how all these
techniques have been applied to the problems of summarizing
semantic graphs. The goal of our tutorial is to acquaint the audi-
ence with the literature in this area, help them identify the tools
and techniques most suited to the summarization problems they
might have, and point out areas of interest for future work.

2 SCOPE

Intended audience. The tutorial aims at a broad range of re-
searchers, students, IT professionals and practitioners, and de-
velopers. Anyone working with semantic graphs and RDF more
specifically will benefit from this tutorial. Students and researchers
will not only get a good introduction to the topic with a complete
coverage of the state-of-the-art, but will also find a number of
challenging research problems in these emerging technologies
on which they may decide to focus their future research efforts.
Practitioners will get a good overview of what the summariza-
tion algorithms, techniques and systems can offer nowadays and
learn how they can use them to enhance their understanding
of their available datasets. Developers of systems relying on se-
mantic graphs will get helpful information that will help them
improve further their products, enhancing query execution, data
visualization and understanding.

Prerequisites: Only basic knowledge of graph theory and some
understanding of graph algorithms is strictly required in order to
appreciate the tutorial. More advanced knowledge, in particular
knowledge on basic query evaluation steps (standard undergradu-
ate curriculum), familiarity with the W3C stack of RDF standards,
Linked Open Data and/or RDF, data mining or data visualization

Figure 1: A taxonomy of the works in the area [3].

may help parts of the audience grasp more quickly some parts of
our tutorial, but are not strictly needed.

Other venues, Related Events: No part of this tutorial has been
presented before. Tutorials in partially overlapping areas have
already been presented over the past three years, at top-tier data-
base conferences. Other tutorials [10, 15] considers the broad
topic of summarizing large graphs, mostly using data mining
tools, and with an approach tailored specifically to social net-
works; the particularities of RDF graphs (and of their summariza-
tion) are not considered.

Intended Duration: Our tutorial is aimed for a duration of three

hours.

2.1 Tutorial goal
The goal of this tutorial is to introduce summarization notions
and tools which are useful in order to concrete RDF data manage-
ment applications. A broad set of techniques will be presented
covering summarization of general RDF graphs, that contain or
not ontological information, independent of their application
domain.

3 OUTLINE
Our tutorial will be organized as follows.

3.1 Introduction and preliminaries (20 min)
We will recall the basics of RDF graphs, RDFS and OWL ontolo-
gies, RDF queries (focusing in particular on conjunctive queries,
the most frequently used in practice) and inference in RDF knowl-
edge graphs in the presence of an ontology.

3.2 Applications (20 min)
Next, we will present the main classes of application contexts
which have justified the need for RDF summaries:

Indexing: The first and foremost application RDF summaries
has been brought by the necessity of efficiently querying large
and complex graphs. In this context, sets of nodes which are likely
to be used together by queries are grouped together and their IDs
are associated to a given summary node. Then, query processing
proceeds in two stages: first, the summary nodes relevant to a
given query are identified; then, from the summary node, an
index lookup gives access directly to the respective data nodes.

Estimating the size of query results: To the same direction with
indexing, summaries can be used to identify directly when no
nodes are available for a specific query. More than this, sum-
maries can also store statistical information on the available
nodes, leading query optimizers to start query evaluation from
the most selective conditions.

Source selection: Query evaluation across several graphs, in
particular in a distributed setting where multiple graphs are each
accessible behind its individual endpoint, can greatly benefit
from the knowledge that one source (or one graph) does not
have results matching a (sub)query. This is one facet of source
selection: restricting query evaluation to avoid datasets on which
it is guaranteed to have no answers. A variant consists of ordering
the graphs to be explored (queried), so that in a finite time budget,
the most interesting graphs are sure to be visited.

Graph visualization and schema discovery: Summarized infor-
mation is easier to be visualized and comprehended. On the other
hand when an ontology is not present, it can be extracted out
of the available data, augmenting user understanding on the
available information.

3.3 Classification & Dimensions (120 min)
Then, we will present a classification of the available approaches
according to the main algorithmic idea behind the summarization
approach. We identify the following main categories; we also
indicate a few of the relevant references (out of the 122 present
in our survey [3]):

(1) Structural methods are those which summarize seman-
tic graphs, based mostly on the graph structure, i.e. the
paths and sub-graphs available in the RDF graph. Tech-
niques in this category can be further categorized as quo-
tient and non-quotient.
• Quotient approaches are based on the idea of charac-
terizing selected graph nodes as "equivalent" in a certain
way, and then summarizing the graph by assigning a
representative summary node to each class of equiva-
lent graph nodes; further, each edge between two graph
nodes leads to the corresponding edge being present
between the two graph node’s representatives. In a quo-
tient summary, each property (edge label) from the in-
put RDF graph is guaranteed present in the summary
graph; more a quotient summary is guaranteed to be at

most as large as the original graph. Different quotient
summaries result from different notions of equivalence
among the RDF graph nodes. Sample works in this area
include [2, 4, 11, 22, 27], while [17] and [9] are important
sources of inspiration from before the RDF age;

• Non-quotient approaches are the remaining methods
that are based mostly, on specific measures according
to which the most important nodes are identified and
then linked to formulate the presented summary. Pio-
neered by Dataguides [6, 20], the area features many
recent works such as [21, 24, 29, 30]; [28] has an infor-
mation retrieval approach, as it aims at extracting the
most interesting triples to be shown to a user about a
subject; [32] summarizes ontologies found on the web,
through the prism of the salience (interestingness) of
their concepts.

(2) Pattern mining methods employee mining techniques
to identify patterns appearing in the semantic graph. A
pattern might be a set of instances having a certain set of
properties, which are in exact or approximate terms repre-
sentative of the graph or provide enough information on
the graph using some cost function to determine that. We
consider also as patterns the discovery of rules that can
be used to reconstruct the graph and thus represent it ad-
equately. Those patterns, together, compose the summary.
Representative works in this area are, e.g., [8, 25, 33];
(3) Statistical methods on the other hand try to qualitatively
summarize the contents of a graph counting occurrences,
building histograms, measuring frequencies and other sta-
tistical measures out of the available semantic graph. This
class comprises notably works such as [5, 7, 23, 31];
(4) Finally, several works combine techniques from several of
the main areas listed above; these are hybrid methods,
e.g., [1, 27] first and foremost aim at estimating the cardi-
nality of query patterns, [26] summarizes RDF graphs and
ontologies through the prism of statistics, while [19] aims
at graph compression with bounded error, that is: a core
(most regular) part of the graph is identified as comprising
several copies of a same data pattern, and compressed into
a single copy of this, whereas the rest is ignored from
the summary and considered to be the summarization er-
ror (which the authors seek to minimize under certain
constraints).

Further, we will characterize each of these proposal along a

set of other informative dimensions:

(1) Input: An interesting dimension of analysis is the in-
put required by each summarization method, as different
approaches have usually different requirements for the
dataset they get as input. RDF data graphs are usually ac-
cepted, RDF/S and/or OWL are considered for some of the
works for specifying graph semantics whereas very few
works consider DL models. Some works are based only on
the ontology part whereas others consider only instances.
Hybrid approaches are also available consuming both in-
stances and the ontology for producing summaries. In
addition, many works in the area require additional user
input of fine tuning (e.g. summary size, weights, equiva-
lence relations etc.) whereas some others are completely
user independent.

(2) Output: Besides input, the available works might have
also different output. The summary for example can be a

graph or a selection of the most frequent structures such as
nodes, paths, rules or queries. In addition we distinguish
summaries that only output instances from those that
output schema information as well.

(3) Availability: Several approaches are available by the au-
thors as complete system/tool and some others provide
only the corresponding algorithms/theory. Finally some
systems are available online and can be readily tested.
(4) Purpose: As already explained in the applications of the
summarization techniques, summaries can be build for
indexing, source selection, visualisation, schema discovery
or for facilitating query answering.

(5) Quality: Finally an important dimension of study, for each
summarization algorithm is its completeness in terms of
coverage, precision and recall of the result if an "ideal"
summary is available as golden standard and its corre-
sponding computational complexity.

Figure 1 presents the various dimensions that will be used in

order to present the works available in each category.

Natural connections exist between the families of RDF sum-
maries and the applications they are best suited for. Structural
quotient summaries are most applicable to indexing and query
answering through graph reduction; this holds especially for
quotients built through equivalence relations such as bisimilar-
ity (possibly bounded). Non-quotient summaries mostly target
visualization, schema discovery and data understanding. Pattern
mining summaries provide in many cases logical rules besides
the summary graph as part of the final result, so could be possibly
more useful in RDF graph compression scenarios. Summaries
could also be really useful in data integration scenarios [14],
where instead of generating mappings [16], [18] between data
source schemas, summaries could be used to drive the defini-
tion of the mapping. Extending this to a scenario where the
sources can also evolve [13], [12], summaries can play a key role
in schema understanding and mapping redefinition.

3.4 Open issues and future research

directions (20 min)

RDF graph summaries can be useful in different application and
research scenarios. Each scenario brings each own specific re-
quirements and the possibility of having more than one items
being suitable is present. One open issue in this respect is whether
one could use the provided taxonomy to further automate the
selection of the appropriate algorithms in the different use cases.
Identifying the quality of the RDF summary is also a difficult
and not really widely addressed problem. The main problem that
remains is how could one compare the summaries produced by
the different algorithms and take into account the specificities of
the problem at hand and provide an RDF summary with some
guarantees. Given that even human experts do not agree on the
quality of different summaries in many cases, this remains a
challenging task.

Finally, one important problem that has been looked up very
little is the updates of the RDF summaries produced, given the
dynamic nature of most RDF datasets as well as their size. It is an
open issue how one could update the summary without having
to recompute the whole summary every time; and this problem
has also a temporal dimension since one should answer not only
how but also when this update is pertinent.

4 PRESENTERS
Haridimos Kondylakis is a scientific collaborator at the Insti-
tute of Computer Science, FORTH. His research interests span the
following areas: Semantic Integration; Knowledge Evolution; Big
Data Management; Data Series Indexing and Querying. He has
extensive experience in participating in more than 16 European
Projects and he also acts as a regular reviewer and a PC member
for a number of premier journals and conferences. He has more
than 110 publications in international conferences, books and
journals including ACM SIGMOD, VLDB, VLDB Journal, JWS,
KER, EDBT, ISWC, ESWC etc.

Dimitris Kotzinos is a Professor at the Department of Com-
puter Science of the University of Cergy âĂŞ Pontoise, member
of the ETIS Lab and head of the MIDI team of the lab. His main re-
search interests include data management algorithms, techniques
and tools; development of methodologies, algorithms and tools
for web-based information systems, portals and web services; and
the understanding of the meaning (semantics) of interoperable
data and services on the web.

Ioana Manolescu is a senior researcher, and the lead of the
CEDAR team, joint between Inria Saclay and the LIX lab (UMR
7161) of Ecole polytechnique, in France. The CEDAR team re-
search focuses on rich data analytics at cloud scale. She is a
member of the PVLDB Endowment Board of Trustees, and a co-
president of the ACM SIGMOD Jim Gray PhD dissertation com-
mittee. Recently, she has been a general chair of the IEEE ICDE
2018 conference, an associate editor for PVLDB 2017 and 2018,
and the program chair of SSDBBM 2016. She has co-authored
more than 130 articles in international journals and conferences,
and contributed to several books. Her main research interests in-
clude data models and algorithms for computational fact-checking,
performance optimizations for semistructured data and the Se-
mantic Web, and distributed architectures for complex large data.

REFERENCES
[1] Anas Alzogbi and Georg Lausen. 2013. Similar Structures inside RDF-Graphs.
In Proceedings of the WWW2013 Workshop on Linked Data on the Web, Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil, 14 May, 2013.

[2] Šejla Čebirić, François Goasdoué, Pawel Guzewicz, and Ioana Manolescu. 2017.
Compact Summaries of Rich Heterogeneous Graphs. Research Report RR-8920.
INRIA Saclay ; Université Rennes 1. https://hal.inria.fr/hal-01325900

[3] Sejla Cebirić, François Goasdoué, Haridimos Kondylakis, Dimitris Kotzinos,
Ioana Manolescu, Georgia Troullinou, and Mussab Zneika. 2018. Summarizing
Semantic Graphs: A Survey. The VLDB Journal (2018). https://hal.inria.fr/
hal-01925496 Accepted for publication, to appear.

[4] Mariano P Consens, Valeria Fionda, Shahan Khatchadourian, and Giuseppe
Pirro. 2015. S+ EPPs: construct and explore bisimulation summaries, plus
optimize navigational queries; all on existing SPARQL systems. Proceedings of
the VLDB Endowment 8, 12 (2015), 2028–2031.

[5] Marek Dudás, Vojtech Svátek, and Jindrich Mynarz. 2015. Dataset Summary
Visualization with LODSight. In The Semantic Web: ESWC 2015 Satellite Events
- ESWC 2015 Satellite Events Portorož, Slovenia, May 31 - June 4, 2015, Revised
Selected Papers. 36–40.

[6] Roy Goldman and Jennifer Widom. 1997. DataGuides: Enabling Query Formu-
lation and Optimization in Semistructured Databases. In VLDB’97, Proceedings
of 23rd International Conference on Very Large Data Bases, August 25-29, 1997,
Athens, Greece. 436–445.

[7] Katja Hose and Ralf Schenkel. 2012. Towards benefit-based RDF source selec-
tion for SPARQL queries. In Proceedings of the 4th International Workshop on
Semantic Web Information Management, SWIM 2012, Scottsdale, AZ, USA, May
20, 2012. 2.

[8] Amit Krishna Joshi, Pascal Hitzler, and Guozhu Dong. 2013. Logical Linked
Data Compression. In The Semantic Web: Semantics and Big Data, 10th Interna-
tional Conference, ESWC 2013, Montpellier, France, May 26-30, 2013. Proceedings.
170–184.

[9] Raghav Kaushik, Philip Bohannon, Jeffrey F. Naughton, and Henry F. Korth.
2002. Covering indexes for branching path queries. In Proceedings of the
2002 ACM SIGMOD International Conference on Management of Data, Madison,
Wisconsin, June 3-6, 2002. 133–144.

[10] Arijit Khan, Sourav S. Bhowmick, and Francesco Bonchi. 2017. Summarizing

Static and Dynamic Big Graphs. PVLDB 10, 12 (2017), 1981–1984.

[11] Shahan Khatchadourian and Mariano P. Consens. 2010. ExpLOD: Summary-
Based Exploration of Interlinking and RDF Usage in the Linked Open Data
Cloud. In The Semantic Web: Research and Applications, 7th Extended Semantic
Web Conference, ESWC 2010, Heraklion, Crete, Greece, May 30 - June 3, 2010,
Proceedings, Part II. 272–287.

[12] Haridimos Kondylakis and Dimitris Plexousakis. 2011. Ontology Evolution
in Data Integration: Query Rewriting to the Rescue. In Conceptual Modeling -
ER 2011, 30th International Conference, ER2011, Brussels, Belgium, October 31 -
November 3, 2011. Proceedings. 393–401.

[13] Haridimos Kondylakis and Dimitris Plexousakis. 2012. Ontology Evolution:
Assisting Query Migration. In Conceptual Modeling - 31st International Confer-
ence ER 2012, Florence, Italy, October 15-18, 2012. Proceedings. 331–344.
[14] Haridimos Kondylakis and Dimitris Plexousakis. 2013. Ontology evolution

without tears. J. Web Sem. 19 (2013), 42–58.

[15] Shou-De Lin, Mi-Yen Yeh, and Cheng-Te Li. 2013. Sampling and Summarization

for Social Networks (tutorial).

[16] Yannis Marketakis, Nikos Minadakis, Haridimos Kondylakis, Konstantina
Konsolaki, Georgios Samaritakis, Maria Theodoridou, Giorgos Flouris, and
Martin Doerr. 2017. X3ML mapping framework for information integration in
cultural heritage and beyond. Int. J. on Digital Libraries 18, 4 (2017), 301–319.
[17] Tova Milo and Dan Suciu. 1999. Index Structures for Path Expressions. In
Database Theory - ICDT ’99, 7th International Conference, Jerusalem, Israel,
January 10-12, 1999, Proceedings. 277–295.

[18] Nikos Minadakis, Yannis Marketakis, Haridimos Kondylakis, Giorgos Flouris,
Maria Theodoridou, Gerald de Jong, and Martin Doerr. 2015. X3ML Frame-
work: An Effective Suite for Supporting Data Mappings. In Proceedings of
the Workshop on Extending, Mapping and Focusing the CRM co-located with
19th International Conference on Theory and Practice of Digital Libraries (2015),
Poznań, Poland, September 17, 2015. 1–12.

[19] Saket Navlakha, Rajeev Rastogi, and Nisheeth Shrivastava. 2008. Graph sum-
marization with bounded error. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGMOD Inter-
national Conference on Management of Data, SIGMOD 2008, Vancouver, BC,
Canada, June 10-12, 2008.

[20] Svetlozar Nestorov, Jeffrey D. Ullman, Janet L. Wiener, and Sudarshan S.
Representative Objects: Concise Representations of

Chawathe. 1997.
Semistructured, Hierarchical Data. In ICDE.

[21] Alexandros Pappas, Georgia Troullinou, Giannis Roussakis, Haridimos Kondy-
lakis, and Dimitris Plexousakis. 2017. Exploring Importance Measures for
Summarizing RDF/S KBs. In The Semantic Web - 14th International Confer-
ence, ESWC 2017, Portorož, Slovenia, May 28 - June 1, 2017, Proceedings, Part I.
387–403.

[22] François Picalausa, Yongming Luo, George H. L. Fletcher, Jan Hidders, and
Stijn Vansummeren. 2012. A Structural Approach to Indexing Triples. In
The Semantic Web: Research and Applications - 9th Extended Semantic Web
Conference, ESWC 2012, Heraklion, Crete, Greece, May 27-31, 2012. Proceedings.
[23] Carlos Eduardo S. Pires, Paulo Orlando Queiroz-Sousa, Zoubida Kedad, and
Ana Carolina Salgado. 2010. Summarizing ontology-based schemas in PDMS.
In Workshops Proceedings of the 26th International Conference on Data Engi-
neering, ICDE 2010, March 1-6, 2010, Long Beach, California, USA. 239–244.
[24] Paulo Orlando Queiroz-Sousa, Ana Carolina Salgado, and Carlos Eduardo S.
Pires. 2013. A Method for Building Personalized Ontology Summaries. JIDM
4, 3 (2013), 236–250.

[25] Qi Song, Yinghui Wu, and Xin Luna Dong. 2016. Mining Summaries for
Knowledge Graph Search. In IEEE 16th International Conference on Data Mining,
ICDM 2016, December 12-15, 2016, Barcelona, Spain. 1215–1220.

[26] Blerina Spahiu, Riccardo Porrini, Matteo Palmonari, Anisa Rula, and Andrea
Maurino. 2016. ABSTAT: Ontology-driven Linked Data Summaries with
Pattern Minimalization. In SumPre.

[27] Giorgio Stefanoni, Boris Motik, and Egor V. Kostylev. 2018. Estimating
the Cardinality of Conjunctive Queries over RDF Data Using Graph Sum-
marisation. In Proceedings of the 2018 World Wide Web Conference on World
Wide Web, WWW 2018, Lyon, France, April 23-27, 2018. 1043–1052. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3178876.3186003

[28] Marcin Sydow, Mariusz Pikula, and Ralf Schenkel. 2013. The notion of diversity
in graphical entity summarisation on semantic knowledge graphs. J. Intell.
Inf. Syst. 41, 2 (2013), 109–149.

[29] Georgia Troullinou, Haridimos Kondylakis, Evangelia Daskalaki, and Dimitris
Plexousakis. 2017. Ontology understanding without tears: The summarization
approach. Semantic Web 8, 6 (2017), 797–815.

[30] Georgia Troullinou, Haridimos Kondylakis, Kostas Stefanidis, and Dimitris
Plexousakis. 2018. Exploring RDFS KBs Using Summaries. In The Semantic
Web - ISWC 2018 - 17th International Semantic Web Conference, Monterey, CA,
USA, October 8-12, 2018, Proceedings, Part I. 268–284.

[31] Gang Wu, Juanzi Li, Ling Feng, and Kehong Wang. 2008. Identifying Potentially
Important Concepts and Relations in an Ontology. In The Semantic Web -
ISWC 2008, 7th International Semantic Web Conference, ISWC 2008, Karlsruhe,
Germany, October 26-30, 2008. Proceedings. 33–49.

[32] Xiang Zhang, Gong Cheng, Weiyi Ge, and Yuzhong Qu. 2009. Summarizing
Vocabularies in the Global Semantic Web. J. Comput. Sci. Technol. 24, 1 (2009),
165–174.

[33] Mussab Zneika, Claudio Lucchese, Dan Vodislav, and Dimitris Kotzinos. 2016.
Summarizing Linked Data RDF Graphs Using Approximate Graph Pattern
Mining. In EDBT 2016. 684–685.

