Secure Email - A Usability Study
Adrian Reuter, Karima Boudaoud, Marco Winckler, Ahmed Abdelmaksoud,

Wadie Lemrazzeq

To cite this version:

Adrian Reuter, Karima Boudaoud, Marco Winckler, Ahmed Abdelmaksoud, Wadie Lemrazzeq. Secure
Email - A Usability Study. International Workshops, AsiaUSEC, CoDeFi, VOTING, and WTSC @
International Conference on Financial Cryptography and Data Security (FC 2020), Feb 2020, Kota
Kinabal, Malaysia. pp.36-46, ￿10.1007/978-3-030-54455-3_3￿. ￿hal-03138769￿

HAL Id: hal-03138769

https://hal.science/hal-03138769

Submitted on 12 Oct 2021

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

Secure Email - A Usability Study 

Adrian Reuter1, Karima Boudaoud2, Marco Winckler2 , Ahmed Abdelmaksoud2,  
Wadie Lemrazzeq2 

1 Technische Universität München, Arcisstraße 21, 80333 München, Germany 
2 Polytech Nice Sophia, 930 route des Colles, 06903 Sophia Antipolis, France 

Abstract.  Several  end-to-end  encryption  technologies  for  emails  such  as  PGP 
and S/MIME exist since decades. However, end-to-end encryption is barely ap-
plied.  To  understand  why  users  hesitate  to  secure  their  email  communication 
and  which  usability  issues  they  face  with  PGP,  S/MIME  as  well  as  with  pEp 
(Pretty Easy Privacy), a fairly new technology, we conducted an online survey 
and user testing. We found that more than 60% of e-mail users are unaware of 
the  existence  of  such  encryption  technologies  and  never  tried  to  use  one.  We 
observed that above all, users are overwhelmed with the management of public 
keys  and  struggle  with  the  setup  of  encryption  technology  in  their  mail  soft-
ware. Even though users struggle to put email encryption into practice, we ex-
perienced roughly the same number of users being aware of the importance of 
email  encryption.  Particularly,  we  found  that  users  are  very  concerned  about 
identity  theft,  as  78%  want  to  make  sure  that  no  other  person  is  able  to  write 
email in their name. 

Keywords: mail encryption, user study, usability, PGP, S/MIME, pEp. 

1 

INTRODUCTION 

To prevent cyber-crime and to protect user privacy, almost all services running on the 
Internet  critically  depend  on  cyber  security  measures.  Most  dominantly,  transport 
layer security (TLS) is used for securing a variety of communication protocols. Par-
ticularly  when  browsing  the  World  Wide  Web,  transport  security  has  found  wide 
adoption  and  awareness  of  its  imperative  necessity.  Internet  Banking,  shopping  on 
Amazon.com,  accessing  governmental  e-services  -  those  are  just  a  few  examples 
where users became more and more aware of the security risks of web applications. A 
huge  step  towards  more  secure  Internet  communication  has  been  the  integration  of 
end-to-end  cryptography  in  mobile  internet  messenger  services  such  as  Whatsapp, 
Signal or Telegram. In contrast, for securing one of the most commonly used commu-
nication  channels,  the  email  end-to-end  encryption  is  only  applied  by  a  negligible 
faction  of  email  users  [1].  Standardized  technologies  for  cryptographically  securing 
email  exchanges  have  been  available  for  decades.  Nevertheless  most  users  rely  on 
unencrypted  and  unauthenticated  email  communication,  often  without  being  aware 
that there exist mechanisms, which would mitigate the security implications that come 
with  it.  Actually,  two  major  end-to-end  encryption  technologies  exist  since  decades, 

2 

namely Pretty Good Privacy (PGP) [2] and Secure Multipurpose Internet Mail Exten-
sions  (S/MIME)  [3].  A  recent  initiative  called  Pretty  Easy  Privacy  (pEp)  [4]  made 
efforts to simplify the usage of end-to-end cryptography in email communication for 
novice  users.  Unfortunately,  those  technologies  are  still  barely  deployed.  According 
to  [1]  more  than  95%  of  the  overall  email  traffic  is  exchanged  without  end-to-end 
encryption.  Therefore,  two  main  research  questions  came  to  our  mind:  1)  why  are 
users hesitating to use e-mail end-to-end encryption technologies and 2) which usabil-
ity issues exist that hinder users from securing their daily email communication using 
end-to-end encryption. To address these questions we have conducted an online sur-
vey  and  user  testing  in  which  participants  actively  use  encryption,  in  order  to  get  a 
precise and authentic view on usability issues. 

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 gives an overview about the 
methodology  used  to  conduct  the  usability  study.  Section  3  discusses  the  obtained 
results.  Finally,  Section  4  concludes  this  paper  and  gives  an  overview  about  future 
works. 

2  METHODOLOGY 

In this section, we present our approach for evaluating the usability of PGP, S/MIME 
and pEp.  

Before  conducting  our  study,  we  have  identified  the  most  commonly  Mail  User 
Agents (MUA) also known as email programs, that - natively or by additional plugins 
- support at least one of the three technologies PGP, S/MIME or pEp. We assessed the 
usability of the encryption features in each of these mail programs to get a personal 
impression  as  well  as  to  anticipate  the  challenges  that  other  users  might  face  when 
cryptographically  securing  their  emails.  Actually,  we  tested  the  integration  of  PGP, 
S/MIME and pEp in today’s most commonly used mail programs (MUA) that support 
end-to-end  encryption  to:  1)  identify  which  encryption  technology  is  supported  by 
which MUA, 2) prevent participants from testing MUAs that turn out to be unusable 
(e.g. due to discontinued development, incompatibility of versions and operating sys-
tem,  ...), 3) anticipate the challenges users could face when trying to use these three 
technologies  in  the  context  of  a  specific  MUA  to  help  them  to  overcome  common 
pitfalls that would otherwise ultimately hinder them from sending a secure e- mail. 

Table 1 represents the Mail User Agents considered in our analysis. It also depicts the 
plugin required to add PGP, S/MIME or pEp functionality to a MUA if not supported 
natively.  From  this  collection  of  MUAs, we had to choose the subset of MUAs that 
will be used for user testing taking into account the popularity of the MUAs and con-
sidering that each encryption technology should be tested on each major platform (if 
supported) and should be free of costs for our participants. We assumed that even if 
the technology is usable, its implementation within an e-mail program might make it 

 
 
 
 
 
 
3 

difficult to use and vice-versa. Therefore, we wanted our participants to test two dif-
ferent  implementations  of  e-mail  encryption,  to  have  a  direct  comparison  of  their 
usability:  a  participant  would  either  test  two  different  technologies  or  she/he  would 
test two different implementations of the same technology. Particularly, when testing 
two different technologies, we let participants test a pEp implementation and a PGP 
or S/MIME implementation, in order to see if pEp indeed meets its goal of simplify-
ing the mail encryption process.  

Table 1. Commonly used mail user agents (MUA) and their support for PGP, S/MIME and pEp 

Technology  Mail User Agents 

PGP 

S/MIME 

pEp 

Outlook Desktop 
2013/2016 
Thunderbird 
Gmail(Webmail) 
Other Webmail 
Apple iOS 
Android 

Windows Mail 
Apple Mail (MacOS) 
Outlook Desktop 
2013/2016 
Thunderbird 
Apple iOS 
Android 

MacOS 
Gmail(Webmail) 
Other Webmail 
Windows Mail 
Thunderbird 
Android 
Apple iOS 
Outlook Desktop 
2013/2016 
MacOS 
Gmail(Webmail) 
Other Webmail 
Windows Mail 

Plugin 
Gpg4o 

Tested 
✓ 

Enigmail 
FlowCrypt 
Mailvelope 
iPG mail app. 
Maildroid and Cryp-
toplugin 
Not Supported 
Not Supported 
Native support 

Native support 
iPhone mail app 
Maildroid and Cryp-
toplugin 
Native support 
Not Supported 
Not Supported 
Native support 
Enigmail 
Official pEp app 
App coming soon 
pEp for outlook 

Not supported 
Not Supported 
Not Supported 
Not supported 

✓ 
✓ 
✓ 
x 
✓ 

x 
x 
✓ 

✓ 
✓ 
✓ 

✓ 
x 
x 
x 
✓ 
✓ 
x 
x 

x 
x 
x 
x 

To  assess  the  use  of  PGP,  S/MIME  and  pEp,  we  have  employed  two  methods:  an 
online survey with 50 participants and conducted a user testing with 12 participants. 
The details about these studies and the corresponding results are given hereafter. 

2.1  Online Survey 

The aim of the online survey on email end-to-end encryption technologies was three-
fold.  First,  to  explore  users  understanding  and  awareness  of  security  in  emails  ex-

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 

changes,  their  expectations  and  opinions  on  end-to-end  encryption.  Second,  to  learn 
about the propagation of PGP, S/MIME and pEp. Third, to compare the results of the 
online survey, which are quantitative, with the results of the user testing, that are qual-
itative.  The  survey  included  closed-ended  questions  (multiple  choice  questions), 
open-ended questions and ranked questions with a balanced rating scale.  

2.2  User Testing 

The user testing was conducted adhering to a predefined testing protocol.  Each  user 
testing started with a short interview of the participant, determining some demograph-
ic data (age, nationality, profession), the preferred MUA to access her/his emails and 
previous  knowledge  the  participant  had  about  cryptography  in  general  or  email  en-
cryption in particular. When the participant was familiar with one of the MUAs, we 
proposed her/him the test scenario related to this MUA so that she/he could focus on 
configuring  and  using  encryption  features  rather  than  struggling  with  an  unknown 
mail software. For the participants who did not have any experience or knowledge on 
any  of  the  MUAs  proposed,  we  helped  them  to  install  and  set  up  a  MUA  up  to  the 
point  that  they  were  able  to  successfully  access  their  mail  account.  Each  participant 
was  then  asked  to  enable  and  configure  the  security  features  of the  chosen  MUA  to 
use a specific email encryption technology and send a secured email to us. When the 
participants  were  struggling  for  more  than  10  minutes  with  a  specific  configuration 
step, we helped them. The user test was completed once we received an email sent by 
the participant that was successfully encrypted and signed. 

3 

EVALUATION 

3.1  Online Survey Results 

The online survey was launched on 30 November 2018 and reached 50 participants on 
12 December 2018 when we started the analysis of the results.  
The  survey  began  with  a  demographic  section.  The  majority  of  the  participants  was 
under 30 years old, coming from Germany, Egypt and Morocco. Most of them were 
students and employees working for IT organizations.  
The  results  concerning  the  participants  personal  experience  with  email  exchange 
showed  that  emails  constitute  a  remarkable  portion  of  their  daily  communications, 
reaching  at  least  7  emails  per  day,  but  most  of  them  were  nor  encrypted  neither 
signed, 38% received at least 1 mail encrypted per day, and less than half of the par-
ticipants were obliged to use end-to-end encryption by their organizations. Regarding 
the  use  of  email  software,  the  participant  used  more  than  one  software.    More  than 
half  of  the  participants  used  dedicated  mobile  applications,  50%  used  webmail,  and 
44% used dedicated desktop applications. 

 
 
 
 
 
5 

Results for PGP 
The results regarding the use of PGP are: 
• 

60%  of  the  participants  never  heard  about  PGP,  40%  knew  PGP  but  only  24% 
were also using it.  
70% of the participants stated that they could not use PGP for all emails due to 
the fact that the recipient did not use PGP.  
25% of the participants thought that it was difficult to find the recipient’s public 
key,  20%  thought  that  configuring  PGP  was  time  consuming  and  just  5%  de-
clared that PGP is not implemented on their favorite platform / email client.  
20% of the participants were always verifying the fingerprint of the recipient key, 
30% were doing it occasionally, 35% never did and 15% did not know. 

• 

• 

• 

•  The participants conceded that PGP guaranties privacy, confidentiality, authentic-
ity and integrity, in addition to the fact that there was no cost for using it. How-
ever,  they  stated  that  comparing  fingerprints  was  difficult  and  time  consuming, 
and required the recipient to use it as well, which was not always the case given 
that PGP was not widely adopted.  

•  Participants suggested to make PGP supported on all platforms and simplify fin-

gerprint comparison. 

Fig. 1. Do you know a technology calle Pretty Good Privacy (PGP) ? 

Results for S/MIME 
The results regarding the use of S/MIME are: 
• 

64% of the participants never heard about S/MIME, 36% knew it but only 18% 
were also using it.  
61% of the participants stated that the recipient was not using S/MIME. 
28%  did  not  trust  digital  certificates  or  its  issuing  entity  and  only  11%  did  not 
know how to obtain digital certificate.  
17% encountered difficulties configuring their environment to use S/MIME.  
27% admitted that they had issues with untrusted certificates and 28% indicated 
that having to pay for a trustworthy certificate is an obstacle.  

• 
• 

• 
• 

•  The  participants  agreed  that  S/MIME  had  the  advantage  of  being  integrated  in 
most  email  clients  including  Apple  MacOS/iOS,  but  they  discredited  it  because 
they needed to pay to obtain a trustfully certificate. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
6 

Results for pEp 
Regarding pEp, the results showed that it is not as known as PGP and S/MIME and 
only  10%  knew  it.  No  participant  stated  that  she/he  ever  used  it.  Moreover,  40%  of 
the participants hesitated to use pEp because their recipients would not use it. 

Results on the overall impression of the users on end-to-end encryption 
The goal of the last part of the survey was to gather the overall impression on end-to-
end  encryption,  by  scaling  the  degree  of  awareness  of  the  participants  on  matter  of 
email exchange security, especially if they had an email piracy issue. 
Assessing  their  overall  impression,  the  participants  were  mostly  aware  of  the  im-
portance of email encryption: 66% thought that email encryption is important to very 
important (34% for important and 32% for very important) . 

Fig.  2.  Considering  a  scenario  of  using  non-  encrypted  email  communication,  which  of  the 
following may occur ? 

Fig. 3. Please indicate the importance that the following security goals have for you 

Considering the scenario of non-secured email exchange, more than 60% of the par-
ticipants could imagine that their emails can be passively or actively tampered with; 
and even larger percentage of 86% assumed that an entity other than the email recipi-
ent can read the email content (Figure 2). 

Assessing the importance of specific security goals, almost all of the participants es-
timated  the  confidentiality,  integrity  and  authenticity  of  their  emails  as  important  or 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 

very  important.  For  only  6%  of  the  participants,  confidentiality  does  not  matter  and 
for only 2% the integrity of the sent emails does not matter (Figure 3). 

3.2  User Testing Results 

For the user testing, we have chosen a convenience sample where we have recruited 
12  users  mostly  young  people  (students  and  IT  users  from  Germany,  Morocco  and 
Egypt but also some family member), between 20 to 30 years old. The user testing has 
been done twice for each participant to test either two different implementation of the 
same technology or two different technologies. 
The user testing allowed us to identify exactly at which steps users struggle the most. 
We noticed that the usability of an encryption technology largely depends on its im-
plementation within a mail program, which leads to the fact that the same technology 
can be laborious to use in one MUA but convenient in another MUA.  
The results presented in this part focus on the tasks that we identified as highly diffi-
cult for the participants to configure and use a specific encryption technology in the 
context of a specific mail program.    

Results for PGP 
The participants faced several difficulties depending on the MUA used: 
•  Outlook 2016: For the task ”upload key pair”, the users were not able to import 
an existing key-pair. The task ”Get recipient key” was also difficult because the 
default  configuration  of  Gpg4o  is  to  connect  to  a  key-server  using  an  unusual 
port, which sometimes results in an empty response or a refused connection. The 
users  were  not  able  to  find  and  download  the  recipient  public  key  on  this  key 
server. Actually, is not trivial for users to identify this issue and accordingly go 
into the respective Outlook settings to change the port number to the one that is 
commonly used in combination with that key server. Moreover, when composing 
a  new  secure  email  and  opting-in  encryption  and/or  signature  feature(s),  the 
graphical  user  interface  became  distorted.  Buttons,  labels  and  text  fields  were 
misaligned and overlapped, making the user interface almost unusable particular-
ly difficult to assess whether the correct option was selected. 

•  Thunderbird: Thunderbird required not only installing Enigmail plugin, but also 
extra configuration options that are not easy to find for the users. The participants 
had to activate the option ”Force using PGP” in the privacy settings of Thunder-
bird  after  installing  the  plugin.  Moreover,  the  option  ”Activate  PGP”  had  to  be 
applied  for  each mail account in the account settings. Finally, the step  ”Get re-
cipient key” was identified as difficult, because Enigmail searched for the miss-
ing recipient public keys on only one server at a time. It was up to the users to 
manually  change  the  key  server  on  which  Enigmail  searches  for  missing  keys, 
which  required  patience  and  willingness  to  tediously  change  the  key  server  set-
tings until succeeding in retrieving the recipient public key from one of the serv-
ers on which the recipient published her/his key. 

•  Maildroid: Maildroid (as all other mobile apps analyzed) offered no functionali-
ty to generate a PGP key-pair  directly  on  the  mobile  device.  The  key  had to be 

 
 
 
8 

generated externally (e.g. on a PC) and then be transferred back to the mobile de-
vice.  There  were  multiple  ways  to  transfer  the  generated  key  pair  (e.g.  self-
sending  it  via  email,  upload  to  a  cloud,  USB  exchange),  but  it  required  intense 
user interaction and downgraded the user experience. 

As summary, we recognize that PGP requires many configuration steps until success-
ful  usage,  which  was  particularly  the  case  for  the  task  concerning  the  import  of  the 
public keys of recipients. This task always turned out to be difficult or tedious for all 
the participants, regardless of the tested platform. This is due to the design principle 
of PGP to let full control to the users with respect to key management – which at the 
same  time  is  demanding  a  basic  understanding  of  asymmetric  cryptography  and  the 
technology. Following the user testing for PGP, we could conclude that the most dif-
ficult  MUA  to  use  PGP  with  was  Thunderbird,  because  of  the  difficulties  that  the 
users faced in addition to the fact that the buttons to get configuration steps done are 
hidden  deeply  in  setting  menus.  In  contrast,  FlowCrypt  was  the  easiest  tool  to  use 
PGP with, as it generates a key-pair for new user with only a few clicks and searches 
for the recipient key automatically on almost all commonly used key-servers. Thereby 
FlowCrypt solves nearly all usability issues encountered by the participants. Unfortu-
nately it comes with two downsides: FlowCrypt uploads the generated key-pair only 
on its proprietary key server which is unknown to most other PGP implementations, 
thus making the import of public keys of FlowCrypt users harder for other users. Sec-
ondly, up to now, FlowCrypt only supports Gmail webmail. 

Results for S/MIME 
The difficulties encountered by the users are as follows: 

•  Outlook  2016/2013:  The  configuration  option  to  let  the  users  import  their  own 
digital certificates was not easy to find and the participants passed too much time 
looking for the button in the settings to import their certificate. In addition, they 
experienced  a  strange  bug.  The  users  could  encrypt  their  outgoing  emails  only 
when replying to an encrypted email already received, but they could not encrypt 
a new email even though they already retrieved the certificate of the recipient. 
iOS 12: The users had to decompress, on a computer, the archive containing the 
requested certificate, received by email, from the issuing Certification Authority. 
Then, they had to send back the certificate (the .pfx file) as an attachment in an 
email to themselves. In addition, before importing the certificate, they needed to 
activate S/MIME manually in the settings of the iPhone. However, the respective 
setting option was fairly hidden in the phone settings menu. 

• 

•  Android: The users had to decompress the received certificate file using another 
platform (e.g. a PC). Then, transfer back the certificate to the mobile device after 
decompressing it. It was the same problem as for iOS. They could only transfer it 
by sending an email to themselves containing the certificate (the .pfx file). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 

To conclude, thanks to the way S/MIME works, it can be used easily by novice users, 
because  the  users  do  not  have  to  generate  any  keys.  They  receive  both  public  and 
private  digital  certificate  and  they  have  just  to  import  it  into  the  MUA.  Once  a  user 
receives a signed email, the sender’s public certificate is integrated automatically into 
the MUA. So, the users do not have to do any supplementary tasks other than config-
uring S/MIME in the desired MUA. However, we can conclude that is very difficult 
to use S/MIME on Outlook, as the options to import the digital certificate are difficult 
to find and the user can send an encrypted email only as reply to an email that is al-
ready secured via S/MIME (digitally signed). Also, on iOS it is very difficult to acti-
vate S/MIME on the device as the option is not easy to find and there is not any way 
for  the  users  to  send  the  pfx  file  back  to  the  device  than  to  send  an  email  to  them-
selves containing the pfx file. Moreover, the configuration to activate S/MIME on the 
iOS devices varies from one iOS version to another. 

Results for pEp 
pEp required only few tasks in order to configure it and use it compared to PGP and 
S/MIME.  Thanks  to  automated  key  management,  non-technical  wording  in  its  user 
interfaces and abstraction of security features, pEp did not show any major usability 
issues that would hinder (novice) users from using it. The comparison of trustwords 
through the so-called pEp handshake, in order to establish trust in the recipient key, 
was  considered  as  convenient  and  rather  an  easy  task  to  do  by  most  of  the  partici-
pants.  Nevertheless,  some  of  the  participants  did  not  understand  why  the  handshake 
was necessary and what to do with the trustwords shown during the handshake graph-
ical user interface. pEp showed to be the easiest technology to use, but unfortunately 
being not (yet) compatible with all major platforms. As a consequence, we could not 
test it on Apple MacOS or Apple iOS platforms, which was used by a large fraction of 
email users. 

4 

RELATED WORK 

In this section, we will give a brief overview on related work. In 2012, Moecke and 
Volkamer  analyzed  all  different  email  services,  defining  security,  usability  and  in-
teroperability criteria and applied them to existing approaches. Based on the results, 
closed and web-based systems like Hushmail were more usable, contrarily to PGP and 
SMIME that require add-ons to carry the key in a secure way [17]. In 2017, Lerner, 
Zeng and Roesner from University of Washington, presented a case study with people 
who  frequently  conduct  sensitive  business.  They  estimated  the  confidence  put  on 
encrypted  emails  using  a  prototype  they  developed  based  on  Keybase  for  automatic 
key management [18]. In 2018, Clark et al. conducted a study focused on: 1) systema-
tization  of  secure  email  approaches  taken  by  industry,  academia,  and  independent 
developers; 2) evaluation for proposed or deployed email security enhancements and 
measurement  of  their  security,  deployment,  and  usability.  Through  their  study,  they 

 
 
 
 
10 

concluded that deployment and adoption of end-to-end encrypted email continues to 
face  many  challenges:  usability  on  a  day-to-day  scale;  key  management  which  re-
mains  very  unpractical.[19].  In  2018,  a  group  of  researchers  from  Brigham  Young 
University  and  University  of  Tennessee  conducted  a  comparative  usability  study  on 
key management in secure emails tools, in which they oversaw a comparative based 
study between passwords, public key directory (PKD), and identity-based encryption 
(IBE). The result of the study demonstrated that each key management has its poten-
tial to be successfully used in secure email [20]. 

5 

CONCLUSION 

In  this  paper,  we  identified  the  most  frequent  usability  issues  that  users  face  when 
protecting their email communication using PGP, S/MIME or pEp. Using both online 
survey  and  user  testing,  we  had  an  overall  view  on  the  awareness  of  the  users  on 
email  encryption  as  well  as  a  detailed  view  on  the  difficulties  they  can  encounter. 
These difficulties have certainly an impact on the fact that they hesitate to use PGP, 
S/MIME or pEp.  
Thanks  to  the  online  survey,  we  were  able  to  identify  the  usability  issues  of  each 
technology and assess the general impression of our audience towards the importance 
of  email  encryption.  The  results  of  the  online  survey  showed  us  that  the  users  were 
aware  of  the  importance  of  email  encryption  with  32%  saying  it  is  very  important. 
Additionally,  users  were  very  concerned  about  identity  theft,  as  78%  of  the  partici-
pants wanted to make sure that no other person is able to write an email using their 
name and 80% of the participants wanted to be sure that the content of their mail is 
not  changed  by  someone  else,  while  being  transferred  to  the  recipient.  This  result 
shows that for many users, signing emails is more important than encrypting them. 

Currently, we are finalizing the correlation of the online survey answers with the re-
sults  of  the  user  testing,  to  validate  if  the  participants  of  the  online  survey  have  the 
same usability issues as the participants of the user testing while using a certain tech-
nology. For future work, we plan to conduct more user testing with different kinds of 
people  (people  with  different  age  categories).  In  addition,  thanks  to  the  results  ob-
tained regarding identity theft and to some feedback we had on our study, we will set 
up another online survey to know the measures (if any) taken by the users to protect 
their identity.  

6 

REFERENCES 

1.  Matthew 

Green, 

E-mail.” 
https://www.newyorker.com/tech/annals-of-technology/  the-daunting-challenge-of-secure-
e-mail; last accessed on 2019/02/13. 

Challenge 

Daunting 

Secure 

“The 

of 

 
 
 
 
11 

2.  D.  Atkins,  W.  Stallings,  and  P.  Zimmermann,  “PGP  Message  Exchange  Formats.”  RFC 

1991 (Informational), Aug. 1996. Obsoleted by RFC 4880. 

3.  B.  Ramsdell,  “S/MIME  Version  3  Message  Specification.”  RFC  2633  (Proposed  Stand-

ard), June 1999. Obsoleted by RFC 3851. 

4.  pEp  Security,  “Pretty  Easy  Privacy.”  https://www.pep.security/;  last  accessed  on 

2019/02/13. 

5.  M.  Elkins,  D.  D.  Torto,  R.  Levien,  and  T.  Roessler,  “MIME  Security  with  OpenPGP.” 

RFC 3156 (Proposed Standard), Aug. 2001. 

6.  J. Callas, L. Donnerhacke, H. Finney, D. Shaw, and R. Thayer, “OpenPGP Message For-

mat.” RFC 4880 (Proposed Standard), Nov. 2007. Updated by RFC 5581. 

7.  Wikipedia,  “Pretty  Good  Privacy.”      https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pretty_Good_Privacy/; 

last accessed on 2019/02/13. 
is 

8.  Josh  Lake, 

“What 

PGP 

encryption 

and 

how 

does 

it  work?.” 

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pretty_Good_Privacy/; last accessed on 2019/02/13. 

9.  Protonmail,  “What  are  PGP/MIME  and  PGP/Inline?.”  https://protonmail.com/support/ 

knowledge-base/pgp-mime-pgp-inline/; last accessed on 2019/02/13. 

10.  N.  Borenstein  and  N.  Freed,  “MIME  (Multipurpose  Internet  Mail  Extensions)  Part  One: 
Mechanisms for Specifying and Describing the Format of Internet Message Bodies.” RFC 
1521 (Draft Standard), Sept. 1993. Obsoleted by RFCs 2045, 2046, 2047, 2048, 2049, up-
dated by RFC 1590. 
Laboratories, 

“Cryptographic 

standard,” 

message 

11.  R. 

syntax 

1993. 

https://ipsec.pl/files/ipsec/Archiwum/pkcs-7.pdf. 
easy 

foundation 

council, 

“Pretty 

12.  pEp 

privacy  whitepaper,” 

2016/07/18. 

https://pep.foundation/docs/pEp-whitepaper.pdf; last accessed on 2019/02/13. 

13.  H.  Marques,  “Pretty  easy  privacy:  Email  formats  and  protocols,”  2016/07/18. 
https://tools.ietf.org/ html/draft-marques-pep-email-02; last accessed on 2019/02/13. 
14.  H.  Marques  and  B.  Hoeneisen,  “Iana  registration  of  trustword  lists:  Guide,  template  and 
iana  considerations,”  2018/06/26.  https://  tools.ietf.org/html/draft-marques-pep-email-02; 
last accessed on 2019/02/13. 

15.  H.  Marques  and  B.  Hoeneisen,  “Pretty  easy  privacy:  Contact  and  channel  authentication 
through  handshake.”  https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-  marques-pep-handshake-00;  last  ac-
cessed on 2019/02/13. 
security  AG, 

documentation 

information.” 

16.  pEp 

general 

official 

“pep 

- 

https://www.pep.security/docs/ general_information.html; last accessed on 2019/02/13. 
17.  M. V. C.T. Moecke, “Usable secure email communications - criteria and evaluation of ex-

isting approaches,” 2012. 

18.  A.  Lerner,  E.  Zeng,  and  F.  Roesner,  “Confidante:  Usable  encrypted  email  a  case  study 

with lawyers and journalists,” 2017. 

19.  J. Clark, P. van Oorschot, S. Ruoti, K. Seamons, and D. Zappala, “Securing email,” 2018. 
20.  S. Ruoti, J. Andersen, T. Monson, D. Zappala, and K. Seamons, “A comparative usability 

study of key management in secure email,” 2018. 

 
 
 
