Principles and practice of multi-agent systems
Qingliang Chen, Paolo Torroni, Serena Villata

To cite this version:

Qingliang Chen, Paolo Torroni, Serena Villata. Principles and practice of multi-agent systems. Knowl-
edge Engineering Review, 2019, 34, ￿10.1017/S0269888918000243￿. ￿hal-02381163￿

HAL Id: hal-02381163

https://hal.science/hal-02381163

Submitted on 27 Nov 2019

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

The Knowledge Engineering Review, Vol. 00:0, 1–24. c(cid:13) 2004, Cambridge University Press
DOI: 10.1017/S000000000000000 Printed in the United Kingdom

Principles and Practice of Multi-Agent Systems

QINGLIANG CHEN, PAOLO TORRONI, SERENA VILLATA

Jinan University, China
E-mail: tpchen@jnu.edu.cn
University of Bologna, Italy
E-mail: p.torroni@unibo.it
Universit´e Cˆote d’Azur, CNRS, Inria, I3S, France
E-mail: villata@i3s.unice.fr

Preface

Agent-based computing addresses the challenges in managing distributed computing systems and
networks through monitoring, communication, consensus-based decision-making and coordinated
actuation. As a result,
intelligent agents and multi-agent systems have demonstrated the
capability to use intelligence, knowledge representation and reasoning, and other social metaphors
like trust, game and institution, not only to address real-world problems in a human-like way but
also to transcend human performance. This has had a transformative impact in many application
domains, particularly in e-commerce, and also in planning, logistics, manufacturing, robotics,
decision support, transportation, entertainment, emergency relief and disaster management, data
mining and analytics. As one of the largest and still growing research ﬁelds of Computer Science,
agent-based computing today remains a unique enabler of inter-, multi- and trans-disciplinary
research.

The International Conference on Conference on Principles and Practice of Multi-Agent Systems
(PRIMA) originally started in 1998 as a regional (Asia-Paciﬁc) workshop and in the last decade
it grew to become one of the leading and inﬂuential scientiﬁc conferences for research on multi-
agent systems. Each year, PRIMA brings together active researchers, developers and practitioners
from both academia and industry to showcase, share and promote research in several domains,
ranging from foundations of agent theory and engineering aspects of agent systems, to emerging
interdisciplinary areas of agent-based research. Previous successful editions were held in Nagoya,
Japan (2009), Kolkata, India (2010), Wollongong, Australia (2011), Kuching, Malaysia (2012),
Dunedin, New Zealand (2014), and Gold Coast Australia (2014). The last two editions were held
in Phuket, Thailand (2016) and in Nice, France (2017).

The eighteenth edition of PRIMA took place from 26 to 30 October 2015 in Bertinoro, FC, Italy
and received 94 submissions from 30 countries. From the 29 papers presented at the conference,
the best theoretically-oriented ones were invited to submit an extended version for the special issue
with Fundamenta Informaticae, while another special issue with the Journal of Agent-Oriented
Software Engineering has been organized around the more practically-oriented papers.

This special issue collects a selection of survey contributions intended to provide a snapshot

of trends and hot topics in PRIMA research.

In particular, the paper Answer Set Programming and Agents by Abeer Dyoub, Stefania
Costantini and Giovanni De Gasperis discusses the potential role of Answer Set Programming
(ASP) in the context of approaches to the development of agents and multi-agent systems
especially in the realm of Computational Logic. After shortly recalling the main agent-oriented
frameworks, the authors introduce ASP and discuss the usefulness of a potential integration of
the two paradigms in a modular heterogeneous framework, and the feasibility of such integration.
Mehdi Dastani, Paolo Torrini and Neil Yorke-Smith, in their paper Monitoring Norms: A
Multi-Disciplinary Survey discuss the notion of monitoring in normative systems. If a norm is
deﬁned as an expected behaviour in a social setting, an issue is how to determine whether an
individual or a group are adhering to this expected behaviour. This process is called monitoring,

2

q. chen et al.

and it is fundamental for processes of accountability, enforcement, regulation, and sanctioning.
Starting with a broad focus and narrowing to the multi-agent systems literature, the authors
address four key questions: what is monitoring, what is monitored, who does the monitoring, and
how the monitoring is accomplished.

In Predictive Models and Abstract Argumentation: the case of High-Complexity Semantics,
Mauro Vallati, Federico Cerutti, and Massimiliano Giacomin describe how predictive models
can be positively exploited in abstract argumentation. On one side, they show that predictive
models are eﬀective for performing algorithm selection to determine which approach is better to
enumerate the preferred extensions of a given argumentation framework. On the other side, they
show that predictive models predict signiﬁcant aspects of the solution to the preferred extensions
enumeration problem. By exploiting an extensive set of argumentation framework features, the
proposed approach is able to provide an accurate prediction about which algorithm would be
faster on a given problem instance, as well as the structure of the solution, where the complete
knowledge of such structure would require a computationally hard problem to be solved.

Radu-Casian Mihailescu, Paul Davidsson, Ulrik Eklund and Jan A. Persson, in their paper A
Survey and Taxonomy on Intelligent Surveillance from a System Perspective, discuss the current
state-of-the-art and provides researchers with an overview of existing surveillance solutions,
analyzing their properties as a system and drawing attention to relevant challenges when
developing, deploying and managing them. In an eﬀort to understand the development of
the advanced solutions, based on their most distinctive characteristics, the authors propose a
taxonomy for surveillance systems to help classify them and reveal gaps in existing research.

The paper Towards Adaptive Multi-Robot Systems: Attempts for Self-Organization and Self-
Adaptation by Christopher-Eyk Hrabia, Marco Lutzenberger and Sahin Albayrak, presents a
comprehensive overview over state-of-the-art solutions in emergent systems, self-organization,
self-adaptation, and robotics. The development of complex systems ensembles that operate in
uncertain environments is a major challenge, as system designers are not able to fully specify
the system during speciﬁcation and development and before it is being deployed. Natural swarm
systems enjoy similar characteristics, yet, being self-adaptive and being able to self-organize,
these systems show beneﬁcial emergent behavior. Similar concepts can be extremely helpful for
artiﬁcial systems, especially when it comes to multi-robot scenarios, which require such solution
in order to be applicable to highly uncertain real world application.

In The composition and formation of Eﬀective Teams. Computer Science meets Organisational
Psychology, Ewa Andrejczuk, Rita Berger, Juan Rodriguez-Aguilar, Carles Sierra and Vctor
Marn-Puchades review the contributions in both the computer science literature and the
organisational psychology literature dealing with the composition and formation of eﬀective
teams. On the one side, they aim at identifying the strengths and weaknesses of the contributions
made by these two diverse bodies of research. On the other hand, they aim at identifying cross-
fertilisation opportunities that help both disciplines beneﬁt from one another.

The paper Dimensions in Programming Multi-Agent Systems by Olivier Boissier, Rafael H.
Bordini, Jomi F. Hubner and Alessandro Ricci, discusses the fact that research on Multi-
Agent Systems moved from Agent-Oriented Programming towards the idea of Multi-Agent
Oriented Programming, in which a multi-agent system program is designed and developed using
together concepts and ﬁrst-class design and programming abstractions that come from various
“dimensions”, e.g., agent, interaction, environment, organisation. In this paper, the authors
provide a practical overview of Multi-Agent Oriented Programming using JaCaMo, a platform
for Multi-Agent Oriented Programming built on top of Jason for programming BDI agents, going
through a sequence of programming steps of increasing complexity.

Conor Muldoon, Michael J. O’Grady, and Gregory M.P. O’Hare discuss in their paper A
Survey of Incentive Engineering for Crowdsourcing game theoretic approaches to the problem in
the crowdsourcing domain and places it in the context of the wider research landscape. With the
growth of the Internet, crowdsourcing has become a popular way to perform intelligence tasks that

Principles and Practice of Multi-Agent Systems

3

hitherto would be either performed internally within an organisation or not undertaken due to
prohibitive costs and the lack of an appropriate communications infrastructure. In crowdsourcing
systems, whereby multiple agents are not under the direct control of a system designer, it cannot
be assumed that agents will act in a manner that is consistent with the objectives of the system
designer or principal agents. In situations whereby agents goals are to maximise their return in
crowdsourcing systems that oﬀer ﬁnancial or other rewards, strategies will be adopted by agents
to game the system if appropriate mitigating measures are not put in place.

In A Review of Learning Planning Action Models, Ankuj Arora, Humbert Fiorino, Damien
Pellier, Marc Merivier and Sylvie Pesty present a survey of the machine learning techniques
applied for learning planning action models. Automated planning has been a continuous ﬁeld of
study since the 1960s, since the notion of accomplishing a task using an ordered set of actions
resonates with almost every known activity domain. However, as we move from toy domains
closer to the complex real world, these actions become increasingly diﬃcult to codify. The reasons
range from intense laborious eﬀort, to intricacies so barely identiﬁable, that programming them
is a challenge that presents itself much later in the process. In such domains, planners now
leverage recent advancements in machine learning to learn action models. This learning provides
an opportunity for the evolution of the model towards a version more consistent and adapted to
its environment, augmenting the probability of success of the plans. It is also a conscious eﬀort
to decrease laborious manual coding and increase quality.

The ten papers in the present collection are the result of a careful selection process followed
by a thorough two-stage reviewing procedure. They represent a signiﬁcant contribution to the
state of the art and the understanding of the theory and practice of multi-agent systems, as well
as oﬀer interesting connections with other domains.

We thank the authors for the considerable eﬀort put into producing papers of such a high
quality, the reviewers for their care and constructive criticism, and the Co-Editors-in-Chief of the
Knowledge Engineering Review, Peter McBurney and Simon Parsons, for allowing us to publish
the resulting collection of papers as a special issue of this journal. Enjoy reading!

