Outpatient vagus nerve stimulation surgery in
drug-resistant epilepsy patients with severe intellectual
disability
Insafe Mezjan, Isabelle Gourfinkel-An, Vincent Degos, Stéphane Clemenceau,

Vincent Navarro, Véronique Masson, Alexandre Carpentier, Bertrand Mathon

To cite this version:

Insafe Mezjan, Isabelle Gourfinkel-An, Vincent Degos, Stéphane Clemenceau, Vincent Navarro, et al..
Outpatient vagus nerve stimulation surgery in drug-resistant epilepsy patients with severe intellectual
disability. Epilepsy & Behavior, 2021, 118, pp.1-4. ￿10.1016/j.yebeh.2021.107931￿. ￿hal-03263469￿

HAL Id: hal-03263469

https://hal.sorbonne-universite.fr/hal-03263469

Submitted on 17 Jun 2021

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

Outpatient vagus nerve stimulation surgery  
in drug-resistant epilepsy patients with severe intellectual disability 

Insafe MEZJAN, MD1; Isabelle GOURFINKEL-AN, MD, PhD2,3; Vincent DEGOS, MD, 
PhD4,5,6; Stéphane CLEMENCEAU, MD1; Vincent NAVARRO, MD, PhD2,3,7; Véronique 
MASSON2; Alexandre CARPENTIER, MD, PhD1,7; Bertrand MATHON, MD1,7. 

1.  APHP, Department of Neurosurgery, Sorbonne University, La Pitié-Salpêtrière 

Hospital, Paris, France. 

2.  APHP, Department of Neurology, Epileptology Unit, Sorbonne University, La Pitié-

Salpêtrière Hospital, Paris, France 

3.  APHP, Reference Center for Rare Epilepsies, Sorbonne University, La Pitié-

Salpêtrière Hospital, Paris, France 

4.  APHP, Department of Anesthesia, Critical Care and Peri-Operative Medicine, Pitié-

Salpêtrière Hospital, Sorbonne University, Paris, France. 

5.  Clinical Research Group ARPE, Sorbonne University, Paris, France. 
6.  INSERM UMR 1141, PROTECT, Paris France. 
7.  Paris Brain Institute, INSERM, CNRS, Sorbonne University, UMR S 1127, Paris 

Brain Institute, ICM, F-75013, Paris, France. 

Reprints and Correspondence: Bertrand Mathon, MD, MSc, Department of Neurosurgery, 

La Pitié–Salpêtrière University Hospital, 47–83, boulevard de l’Hôpital, 75651 Paris Cedex 

13, France. Tel: +33 (0)1 84 82 73 63; e-mail: bertrand.mathon@aphp.fr 

ORCID: 0000-0002-9182-5846 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ABSTRACT 

Purpose: Vagus nerve stimulation (VNS) implantation is increasingly proposed in outpatient 

procedure.  Some  epilepsy  syndromes  are  associated  with  severe  neurodevelopmental 

disabilities  (intellectual  disability,  autism)  and  often  motor  or  sensory  handicaps,  making 

ambulatory surgery more complex.  

Methods: We prospectively assessed the feasibility and safety of outpatient VNS implantation 

in  26  adult  drug-resistant  epilepsy  patients  with  severe  intellectual  disability  between 

December 2017 and October 2020.  

Results: The male-to-female ratio was 0.9 and the mean age on surgery day was 23.1 years. 

Seventeen  patients  (65.4%)  suffered  from  epileptic  encephalopathy,  7  (26.9%)  from 

cryptogenic  or  genetic  generalized  epilepsy  and  2  (7.7%)  from  severe  multifocal  epilepsy. 

Postoperatively,  all  patients  discharged  the  day  of  surgery.  No  patient  was  admitted  to  a 

hospital or have consulted within one month due to postoperative complications. No surgery-

related complication underwent during the patients’ follow-up.  

Conclusion: Our study highlights the safety and feasibility of VNS surgery in an outpatient 

setting  for  patients  with  severe  intellectual  disability.  We  report  detailed  protocol  and 

preoperative checklist to optimize outpatient VNS surgery in these not able-bodied patients. 

Severe disabilities or epilepsy-associated handicaps should not be an exclusion criterion when 

considering ambulatory VNS implantation.  

KEYWORDS 

Ambulatory; epilepsy surgery; epileptic encephalopathy; postoperative management; drug-

resistant epilepsy; multiple disabilities.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
1.  INTRODUCTION  

Epilepsy affects 1% of the population and one-third of patients have seizures refractory 

to  pharmacotherapy.[1]  Vagus  nerve  stimulation  (VNS)  has  been  part  of  the  surgical 

management for drug-resistant epilepsy for over 20 years. Following VNS, about 50% to 60% 

of  patients  achieve  50%  reduction  in  seizure  frequency  and  8%  show  complete  seizure 

freedom.[1,2]  

VNS implantation is increasingly proposed in outpatient procedure.[3] In our institution, 

VNS  implantation  was  performed  on  outpatient procedure  as the  standard  of  care for  able-

bodied patients since March 2017.  

Some  epilepsy  syndromes  are  associated  with  intellectual  disabilities  and  multiple 

handicaps, making ambulatory surgery more complex. However, the families and guardians of 

these  patients  usually  request  outpatient  care  to  avoid  disturbance  of  their  emotional  and 

behavioral balance. 

We aimed to assess the feasibility and safety of outpatient VNS implantation in multiply 

handicapped patients.  

2.  METHODS 

2.1. Patient selection and study design 

We  enrolled  all  severely  handicapped  patients  over  the  age  of  18  years  with  drug-

resistant  epilepsy  who  were  referred  for  VNS  surgery  at  the  Pitié-Salpêtrière  University 

Hospital (Paris, France) between December 2017 and October 2020. The exclusion criteria for 

ambulatory  VNS  implantation  were  i)  whether  the  parent  or  legal  guardian  has  refused  an 

outpatient management, ii) whether the patient had medical comorbidity necessitating more 

than  6  hours  of  postoperative  observation  (e.g.  hemostasis  disorders)  and  iii)  whether  the 

patient was not living within a radius of less than one hour of transport of the hospital.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
All  patients  underwent  epileptological  evaluations  in  our  Reference  Center  for  Rare 

Epilepsies. These data were analyzed by a multidisciplinary team to determine whether VNS 

was  indicated.  The  following  variables  were  registered:  age,  sex,  American  Society  of 

Anesthesiologists class (ASA 1–5), medication(s), time from initiation to completion of surgery, 

time  from  initiation  to  completion  of  anesthesia,  time  from  completion  of  anesthesia  to 

discharge, modified post anesthetic discharge scoring system (mPADS, Fig. 1), discharge to 

home, institution, or hospital, hospital admission within one month after surgery, unplanned 

consultation  within  one  month  after  surgery,  surgery-related  complication  and 

thromboembolism  presenting  within  one  month  after  surgery,  persistent  dysphagia  and 

hoarseness  at six weeks. 

2.2. Preoperative period, day surgery and postoperative management (Fig.1) 

All  instructions  were  prior  given  during  a  preoperative  therapeutic  education 

consultation  conducted  by  a  specialty  nurse  in  the  presence  of  the  patient,  his  legal 

representatives  and  often  member  of  his  institution  (Table  1).  All  VNS  surgeries  were 

scheduled  for  the  morning  in  order  to  allow  for  sufficient  postoperative  observation  and 

discharge before 7 pm on the day of surgery. A povidone-iodine shower was performed in the 

morning of the intervention at home and patient was admitted in the morning in the outpatient 

surgery unit. To decrease surgery induced patient’s stress, the guardian was present in the 

operating room until the anesthesia induction was complete, as well as in the recovery unit 

after  the  surgery.  The  procedure  was  performed  under  general  anesthesia  as  previously 

described.[4] The patient was then observed for at least 2 hours in a recovery unit.  

A snack was provided to the patient upon return to the outpatient surgery unit. Patient 

was  discharged  if  the  following  modified  clinical  discharge  criteria  (mCDC,  Fig.1)[5]  were 

satisfactory. Precautionary instructions and warning signs as well as emergency call numbers 

were  given  to  the  guardian  on  discharge  (Table  1).  The  guardian  was  strongly  advised  to 

closely  monitor  the  patient  the  first  night  after  surgery.  One  of  the  board-certified 

neurosurgeons can be contacted by mobile phone 24 hours a day, 7 days a week and guardian 

 
 
 
 
was  requested  to  call  the  hospital  with  any  question  or  concerns.  Neurosurgeon’s  email 

address was also provided to the guardian in case of doubt on wound healing. 

The day after surgery the guardian was contacted by a specialty trained nurse. If the 

patient  had  problems  or  complaints,  he  received  further  supervision.  Three  weeks  after 

surgery, the patient consulted the neurologist to turn the stimulator on and adjust stimulation 

parameters. A follow-up neurosurgical consultation was routinely done 6 weeks after surgery 

during which guardian’s satisfaction about outpatient management was assessed.  

2.3. Judgement criteria 

The primary endpoints were i) an unplanned hospitalization following VNS surgery, ii) 

an  unplanned  hospitalization  or  consultation  related  to  VNS  surgery  within  one  month  of 

surgery  and  iii)  surgery-related  complications.  The  secondary  endpoint  was  the  guardian’s 

satisfaction scale (from very dissatisfied to very satisfied). 

2.4 Standard protocol approvals  

The  database  is  registered  with  the  Commission  Nationale  de  l'Informatique  et  des 

Libertés (n°. 2214386). In accordance with the ethical standards of our hospital's institutional 

review  board,  written  informed  consent  was  obtained  from  all  patients’  guardians.  The 

manuscript  was  prepared 

in  accordance  with 

the  STrengthening  the  Reporting  of 

OBservational studies in Epidemiology (STROBE) statement. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.  RESULTS  

3.1 Patients’ characteristics  

During  the  study  period,  74  patients  underwent  VNS  surgery,  out  of  which  34  had 

severe intellectual disability. Eight did not meet the above-mentioned prespecified criteria: four 

patients  were  living  too  far  from  hospital,  3  families  refused  the  protocol  and  one  had 

hemostasis disorders.  Twenty-six patients (76.5%) were eligible for outpatient management 

and were included in the study. 

The  male-to-female  ratio  was  0.9  and  the  mean age  on  surgery  day  was  23.1+/-6.7 

years.  Seventeen  patients  (65.4%)  suffered  from  epileptic  encephalopathy,  7  (26.9%)  from 

drug-resistant cryptogenic or genetic generalized epilepsy and 2 (7.7%) from severe multifocal 

epilepsy.[6] Twenty-two patients (84.6%) were treated with three or more antiepileptic drugs 

at the time of surgery. All patients had severe cognitive and behavioral disabilities, have been 

placed  under  extended  guardianship  and  were  living  in  institutions.  All  patients  except  one 

were classified as ASA 3 during the pre-anesthesia consultation. 

3.2 Patients’ outcomes  

Operative  and  peri-operative  durations  are  summarized  in  Fig.1.  During  the 

postoperative observation, the mCDC have been reached for all patients enabling discharge 

to home (71.4%) or to institution (28.6%) the day of surgery. Patients who were discharged to 

home came back to their institution within days (range 1 - 7 days) according to the patient's 

family wish. The mPADS score for assessing patient discharge ability was 8/8 in 25 patients 

(89.3%) and 7/8 in 3 patients (10.7%). No patient was admitted to a hospital or consulted within 

one  month  due  to  postoperative  complications.  In  addition,  no  surgery-related  complication 

underwent during the patients’ follow-up.  

Out  of  22  guardians,  77.3%  were  very  satisfied  and  22.7%  were  satisfied  with  the 

outpatient management. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.  DISCUSSION  

In  our  series,  26  drug-resistant  epilepsy  patients  with  severe  intellectual  disability 

underwent a VNS implantation in an outpatient setting and all were successfully discharged 4 

hours after the procedure. No patient required an unplanned consultation or rehospitalization. 

There  were  no  complications  or  negative  outcomes  as  a  result  of  early  discharge.  The 

satisfaction rate from the guardians as regards to the same-day discharge was excellent. Thus, 

our study confirms the safety and feasibility of VNS implantation in patients with intellectual 

disability in an outpatient setting.  

Improvement in perioperative care has led to earlier discharge and to the development 

of  outpatient  procedures  in  neurosurgery.  In  addition  to  its  medical  and  psychological 

advantages for the patient, outpatient neurosurgery optimizes health care costs and hospital 

bed flow.[7] VNS implantation is performed as a day-surgery in 79.5% of cases in the USA [8] 

but less performed procedure in patients with disabilities.  

We  strongly  believe  that  ambulatory  surgery  is  a  valuable  strategy  for  patients  with 

intellectual disability. An overnight stay in the hospital can easily disturb their emotional and 

behavioral  balance.[9]  Furthermore,  hospital-based  complications  such  as  nosocomial 

infection  and  medical  error  are  avoided,  which  is  crucial  for  these  vulnerable  patients  with 

complex  condition  and  treatments.  We  experienced  no  surgery-related  complication  in  our 

series  and  no  patient  required  an  unplanned  consultation  or  rehospitalization.  Our  results 

confirm the low rate of complication previously mentioned in the literature. Indeed, Kalanithi et 

al. reported a one-year reoperation rate of 3.9% and a complication rate within the first 30 days 

<2%.[8] The most common surgical complications being hoarseness, voice alteration, dyspnea 

and postoperative pain.[10] Because infirmities and intellectual disability are usually exclusion 

criteria for outpatient surgery, we found no data in the literature concerning VNS implantation 

as day-case surgery in severely handicapped patients. To our knowledge, our study is the first 

one focusing on VNS implantation as an outpatient surgery in this particular population. 

Multiple factors may explain our high discharge rate and lack of complication:  

 
 
 
 
 
-The existence of an outpatient surgery unit in our institution with a dedicated and experienced 

team[11] and clearly established protocols (Table 1).  

-The  close  cooperation  between  neurosurgeons,  anesthesiologists  and  the  ambulatory 

surgery unit nurses was established prior to the study. Indeed, ambulatory VNS implantation 

became  the  standard  of  care  for  able  bodied  patients  nine  months  prior  to  the  inclusion  of 

severely handicapped patients.  

-The need for an appropriate discharge environment: two of our inclusion criteria being living 

within a radius of less than one hour of transport of the hospital and the need for the patient’s 

guardian to be present and available to care for the patient after the procedure. The caregivers 

are appropriately educated on the possible complications and their early signs. Because the 

primary  family  caregivers  are  critical  partners  in  the  plan  of  care  for  severely  handicapped 

patients, they have often acquired the skills and knowledge necessary to appropriately care 

for the patient. They are usually in tune with the patient’s needs and comfort making them the 

best caregiver possible for the patient. After VNS surgery, patients can thereby discharge from 

hospital to home or to their institution depending on both the family's preference and the home 

environment.   

-To  minimize  the  infection  risk,  we  make  a  reinforced  initial  wound  bandage  (Fig.1)  and 

prescribe  daily  wound  care  by  a  nurse  at  home  until  complete  healing.  For  the  patient’s 

comfort, the closure of the skin wound is done using absorbable suture thread. 

Our  outpatient  protocol  is  met  with  a  high  rate  of  satisfaction  from  the  patients’ 

guardians. This  is  consistent  with  reports  of  high  patient  satisfaction following  various  brain 

and spine surgery in an outpatient setting.[12] Guardians’ satisfaction in our study is in part 

due to the guardian-centered strategy we adopted to minimize the patient’s anxiety. To help 

the patient cope with the stressful environment, the guardian is present in the operating theater 

until the anesthesia induction is complete, as well as in the recovery unit after the procedure. 

This is in line with the benefits of a discharge on surgery-day as it allows the patients to recover 

in a familiar environment with assistance and observation provided by their usual caregivers. 

This effectively reduces the psychological impact of a hospitalization in this fragile population. 

 
Our study has some limitations. First, it is monocentric, observational design, including 

a small number of patients. Second, our institution being a reference center for rare epilepsies 

induces  a  selection  bias,  but  also  reflects  the  real-world  picture  of  drug-resistant  epilepsy 

patients with severe intellectual disability. Third, the guardian’s satisfaction evaluation is based 

on  a  subjective  and  qualitative  questionnaire.  Further  studies  should  assess  guardian’s 

satisfaction  using  objective  measurements  and/or  validated 

form.  Last,  outpatient 

management in our center relies on the extensive experience of our team, and those results 

may  not  be  immediately  reproducible  in  every  center  that  are  not  already  familiar  with  the 

outpatient management of able-bodied patients. 

5.  CONCLUSION 

Our study highlights safety and feasibility of VNS surgery in an outpatient setting among 

26 patients with severe intellectual disability. Developmental disability or associated multiple 

handicaps  should  not  be  an  exclusion  criterion  when  considering  ambulatory  VNS 

implantation. Development of this outpatient procedure makes it possible to offer VNS surgery 

to  more  patients  in  this  particular  group  whose  families  may  be  reluctant  to  traditional 

hospitalization in the neurosurgery department. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  

The authors thank Dr. Steffen Fetzer for advice and discussion concerning the manuscript. 

ETHICAL PUBLICATION STATEMENT 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
We confirm that we have read the Journal’s position on issues involved in ethical publication 

and affirm that this report is consistent with those guidelines.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LEGENDS 

Fig. 1. Timeline of outpatient vagus nerve stimulation surgery in drug-resistant epilepsy 

patients with severe intellectual disability.  

Surgery  hours  are  provided  for  guidance  purposes  only  for  a  patient  operated  on  the  first 

position. The occlusive bandage is designed in such a way that the patient cannot access to 

his wound. This reinforced bandage can be lightened the day after surgery. Nursing care: A 

nurse makes daily wound care at patient’s home until complete healing. In case of abnormality 

or doubt on wound healing, he/she would be asked to send a picture of the wound by email 

directly to the neurosurgeon. 

D, day; OR, operating room; VNS, vagus nerve stimulation. Durations are presented as mean 

(min – max). 

Table 1. Preoperative checklist for outpatient vagus nerve stimulation surgery in drug-

resistant epilepsy patients with severe intellectual disability. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 

[1]  Englot DJ, Rolston JD, Wright CW, Hassnain KH, Chang EF. Rates and Predictors 

of  Seizure  Freedom  With  Vagus  Nerve  Stimulation  for  Intractable  Epilepsy. 

Neurosurgery 2016;79:345–53. https://doi.org/10.1227/NEU.0000000000001165. 

[2]  González  HFJ,  Yengo-Kahn  A,  Englot  DJ.  Vagus  Nerve  Stimulation  for  the 

Treatment 

of 

Epilepsy.  Neurosurg  Clin  N  Am 

2019;30:219–30. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nec.2018.12.005. 

[3]  Mallereau  C-H,  Ollivier  I,  Valenti-Hirsch  M-P,  Hirsch  E,  Proust  F,  Chaussemy  D. 

Vagus nerve stimulation in epilepsy: Efficiency and safety of outpatient practice. 

Neurochirurgie 2020;66:270–4. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuchi.2020.04.134. 

[4]  Giordano  F,  Zicca  A,  Barba  C,  Guerrini  R,  Genitori  L.  Vagus  nerve  stimulation: 

Surgical  technique  of  implantation  and  revision  and  related  morbidity.  Epilepsia 

2017;58 Suppl 1:85–90. https://doi.org/10.1111/epi.13678. 

[5]  Chung F, Chan VW, Ong D. A post-anesthetic discharge scoring system for home 

readiness 

after 

ambulatory 

surgery. 

J  Clin  Anesth 

1995;7:500–6. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/0952-8180(95)00130-a. 

[6]  Scheffer IE, Berkovic S, Capovilla G, Connolly MB, French J, Guilhoto L, et al. ILAE 

classification  of  the  epilepsies:  Position  paper  of  the  ILAE  Commission  for 

Classification 

and 

Terminology. 

Epilepsia 

2017;58:512–21. 

https://doi.org/10.1111/epi.13709. 

[7]  Marigil  M,  Bernstein  M.  Outpatient  neurosurgery  in  neuro-oncology.  Neurosurg 

Focus 2018;44:E19. https://doi.org/10.3171/2018.3.FOCUS1831. 

[8]  Kalanithi  PSA,  Arrigo  RT,  Tran  P,  Gephart  MH,  Shuer  L,  Fisher  R,  et  al. 

Rehospitalization  and  emergency  department  use  rates  before  and  after  vagus 

nerve stimulation for epilepsy: use of state databases to provide longitudinal data 

across  multiple  clinical  settings.  Neuromodulation  J  Int  Neuromodulation  Soc 

2014;17:60–4; discussion 64-65. https://doi.org/10.1111/ner.12051. 

[9]  Pellock JM, Morton LD. Treatment of epilepsy in the multiply handicapped. Ment 

Retard  Dev  Disabil  Res  Rev  2000;6:309–23.  https://doi.org/10.1002/1098-

2779(2000)6:4<309::AID-MRDD10>3.0.CO;2-I. 

[10]  Pérez-Carbonell L, Faulkner H, Higgins S, Koutroumanidis M, Leschziner G. Vagus 

nerve  stimulation  for  drug-resistant  epilepsy.  Pract  Neurol  2020;20:189–98. 

https://doi.org/10.1136/practneurol-2019-002210. 

[11]  Gilmartin J, Wright K. The nurse’s role in day surgery: a literature review. Int Nurs 

Rev 2007;54:183–90. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1466-7657.2007.00528.x. 

[12]  Outpatient  neurosurgery:  Expert  Review  of  Neurotherapeutics:  Vol  16,  No  4  n.d. 

https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1586/14737175.2016.1158104 

(accessed 

January 3, 2021). 

 
