Eﬀiciently identifying disguised nulls in heterogeneous
text data
Théo Bouganim, Ioana Manolescu, Helena Galhardas

To cite this version:

Théo Bouganim, Ioana Manolescu, Helena Galhardas. Eﬀiciently identifying disguised nulls in het-
erogeneous text data. BDA (Conférence sur la Gestion de Données – Principles, Technologies et
Applications), Oct 2021, Paris, France. ￿hal-03347947￿

HAL Id: hal-03347947

https://inria.hal.science/hal-03347947

Submitted on 17 Sep 2021

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

Efficiently identifying disguised nulls in heterogeneous text data

Théo Bouganim★ Helena Galhardas† Ioana Manolescu★
★Inria & IPP, †INESC-ID & IST, Univ. Lisboa
theo.bouganim@inria.fr,hig@inesc-id.pt,ioana.manolescu@inria.fr

ABSTRACT
Digital data is produced in many data models, ranging from highly
structured (typically relational) to semi-structured models (XML,
JSON) to various graph formats (RDF, property graphs) or text.
Most real-world datasets contain a certain amount of null values,
denoting missing, unknown or unapplicable information. While
some data models allow representing nulls by special tokens, so-
called disguised nulls are also frequently encountered: these are
values that are not syntactically speaking nulls, but which do, nev-
ertheless, denote the absence, unavailability or unapplicability of
the information.

This paper describes our ongoing work toward detecting dis-
guised nulls in textual data, encountered in ConnectionLens graphs.
Driven by journalistic applications, we focus for now on large,
semistructured datasets, where most or all data values are free-
form text. We show that the state-of-the-art methods for detecting
nulls in relational databases, mostly tailored towards numerical
data, do not detect disguised nulls efficiently on such data. Then,
we present two alternative methods: (i) leveraging Information Ex-
traction, and (ii) text embeddings and classification. We detail their
performance-precision trade-offs on real-world datasets.

1 INTRODUCTION
Digital data is being produced and reused at unprecedented rates.
Large datasets are usually processed within data management sys-
tems, which model the data according to a given data model, pro-
vide means to store it, and to query it using a declarative query
language or another form of query API. The database industry
has been pioneered by relational database management systems
(RDBMSs), whose foundations lay in first-order logic, formalization
by E. F. Codd [11] and subsequent work, e.g., [2].

Where there is data, there are null values Since the early data-
base days, nulls have been identified as a central concept denoting
missing, unknown or unapplicable information. The semi-structured
data model, first embodied in OEM (the Object Exchange Model) al-
lowed to hope the need for nulls would disappear: missing informa-
tion is simply not represented at all in the data [15]. However, stan-
dard semi-structured models such as XML and JSON re-introduced,
e.g., xsi:nil in tools supporting XML Schema or the special null value
in JSON. Presumably, such null tokens were felt needed in practice
because "perfect and complete" databases, regardless of their data
model, are the exception rather than the norm. At query time, null
values are typically handled through the so-called three value logic:
a predicate over a null value always evaluates to unknown (neither
true nor false), and query results only include tuples on which the
query predicates evaluated to true.

Disguised nulls in relational databases In practice, it has been

noted that relational databases often feature not only null tokens,
but also non-null values playing the semantic role of nulls, also called
disguised nulls [1]. For instance, the birth department of all French
residents born out of France is coded 99 in public databases such
as the Social Security one; 0 or −1 are often used to encode an
unknown (but non-zero) number such as a price or a number of
items sold; users may enter "none, "-", "unknown" or "N/A" or any
other similar phrase or token, in entry forms requiring numbers,
names or dates that they are unable or unwilling to fill in. Further,
when a value needs to be chosen from a predefined set, such as a
state of the U.S., users may forget to set it from the menu, leaving
the default value which just happens to be the first, e.g., "Alabama"
in a form requiring users to select a state of the USA.

Data entry forms sometimes prevent null codes by checking
the entered value, e.g., "N/A" would not be accepted as a number.
However, null codes may still persist: (𝑖) users replace "N/A" with 0
for an unknown, non-zero number; (𝑖𝑖) if the expected input type is
free text, e.g., "List of industrial collaborations in connection with
this research", no simple format-driven validation applies; (𝑖𝑖𝑖) in
cases such as "Alabama" above, the value is in the correct domain.

Detecting disguised nulls As explained above, null values require
special treatment when querying data; this treatment is built in
data management systems when the nulls are explicit. However,
disguised nulls require dedicated detection methods, and several
methods have been proposed for relational databases [17, 20, 21].
These methods are based on statistical analysis of the data. They
can detect, for instance, when a value such as 0 is suspiciously
frequent in a numeric attribute, or when a value of attribute 𝑅.𝑎 is
an outlier in the joint distribution of (𝑅.𝑎, 𝑅.𝑏), where we expect
the distributions 𝑅.𝑎, 𝑅.𝑏 to be independent. Detecting disguised
nulls is important for data cleaning (users may want to replace
them with explicit nulls), and for query correctness: null values
should not match any selection predicate, and there should be no
join on null values.

Problem statement and outline In this work, we consider the
detection of disguised nulls in textual, heterogeneous data. The mo-
tivation for our work came from ConnectionLens [5, 10], a system
capable of integrating structured, semistructured or unstructured
data into graphs, which are enriched by adding all the entities
(people, organizations, places, URIs, dates etc.) encountered in var-
ious text nodes. We have developed ConnectionLens inspired by
fact-checking and data journalism applications [6, 8]. We encoun-
tered many datasets where some fields are free-form text entered
by users. For instance, in the French Transparency dataset HATVP,
elected officials need to state "their direct financial participation in
company capitals"; in the PubMed bibliographic database, free-form
texts include the article titles, abstracts, funding statements, and

possible acknowledgments. Disguised nulls encountered in such
fields range from "N/A" or "-" to "Liz Smith has not received any
funding related to this work" or "No conflicts of interest, financial,
or otherwise are declared by the authors." or "There is no conflict
of interest relating to Authors. The manuscript was prepared ac-
cording to scientific and ethical rules." (in this case, the financial
acknowledgment question does not apply to the authors). Detecting
disguised nulls in ConnectionLens graphs is important:

(1) First, it allows to avoid unifying nodes with identical or
similar labels [5] if these are disguised nulls, e.g., if two
companies are described as having "Unknown" CEO, this
should not lead to a connection between the two companies
through the node labeled "Unknown"; this can be seen as
the graph counterpart of the fact that null values should not
join in relational databases.

(2) Second, if we know that a string is a disguised null, we can
avoid extracting entities from it; this is potentially useful,
because entity extraction dominates by far the cost of con-
structing ConnectionLens graphs [5, 6].

How to detect such disguised nulls? We describe below alterna-

tive methods and simultaneously the structure of the paper.

(1) We first show that ConnectionLens entity extraction can be
leveraged to (manually) establish an entity profile for each
set of text attributes in which we want to detect nulls, and
consider any value deviating from this profile a disguised
null. For instance, the entity profile of financial participation
descriptions could be Organization+ to state that it should
contain at least one organization, whereas the entity profile
of a funding statement could be Person+ Organization+: in a
funding acknowledgement, at least an author name and at
least a funding organization should appear. This method is
quite accurate, however, it incurs a high computational cost,
since entity extraction is a complex operation (Section 4).
(2) To address this shortcoming, we devised a novel method,
which relies on text embeddings and classification, while
also leveraging entity extraction on a much smaller portion
of the dataset.

(3) We demonstrate that this method is much more efficient
than the one based on entity profiles, while also being very
accurate (Section 5). We perform a set of experiments on the
state of the art (FAHES) mostly aimed at numeric data. Our
experiments show that they do not perform very well on
free texts values and less structured data (Section 6.3).

We show the impact of our work on the time needed to build a
ConnectionLens graph before concluding and providing some per-
spectives.

2 RELATED WORK
In this section, we recall the main methods for disguised null detec-
tion in relational database. To our knowledge, no similar methods
have been studied for semi-structured nor graph data.

Foundational work in this area was made in [20], which intro-
duced and formalized the problem of Disguised Missing Values
(DMV), and measured its influence on different data science mod-
els. A set of statistical models (mutually disjoint hypothesis) were

Théo Bouganim

★

★
Helena Galhardas† Ioana Manolescu

introduced in [19] on the existence of missing values (explicit or
disguised nulls):

• The MCAR (Missing Completely At Random) model posits
that the probability of a value to be missing is the same for
any value of an attribute, and does not depend on the values
of any other attribute. For instance, assuming an attribute
is the result of a physical measure made with a device that
breaks down, the resulting missing values are not correlated
to any other aspect of the data or of the values.

• The MAR (Missing At Random) model considers that the
probability for a value to be missing depends on values en-
countered in other attributes of the same table (these notions
have been defined for tables). For example, in a political poll,
let assume young voters are more likely not to declare their
political preference. Then, the political preference value is
MAR.

• MNAR (Missing Not At Random) applies when neither MAR
nor MCAR hold, and when the probability for a value to be
missing does depend on the actual value that is missing, but
not on the values of any other attribute. For instance, assum-
ing supporters of a certain political party generally avoid
stating their preference and instead let that information go
missing, such values are MNAR.

Building upon these models, [17] has proposed a heuristic method
for identifying DMVs in relational databases. Under the MAR and
MCAR assumptions, the authors assume that a value 𝑣 in attribute
𝐴𝑖 in a table 𝑇 is a DMV if 𝜎𝐴𝑖 =𝑣 (𝑇 ) contains a subset 𝑇 ∗
𝐴𝑖 =𝑣 that
represents a good sampling of 𝑇 . Such a subset is an Embedded
Unbiased Sample (EUS) which means that except for attribute 𝐴𝑖 ,
𝑇 ∗
𝐴𝑖 =𝑣 and 𝑇 have similar distributions. Then, a MEUS (Maximal
EUS) is intuitively an EUS with a good trade-off between size (larger
is better) and similarity (in distribution) with 𝑇 . largest EUS with
the highest similarity. The gist of the [17] heuristics is to find MEUS
in a dataset, and consider their associated 𝐴𝑖 = 𝑣 values as DMVs.
FAHES [21] incorporates the method of [17], to which the au-
thors add two other methods, in order to distinguish three classes
of DMV.

• The first class contains syntactic outliers. A syntactic out-
lier is a value whose syntax is significantly different from
that of other values in the same attribute. Two techniques are
used to identify them. (𝑖) Syntactic pattern discovery infers
a frequent syntactic pattern (shape) for the values of each
attribute, and points out the values that do not fit the pattern
as syntactic outliers. For example, if the attribute is "blood
type", the recognized pattern could be one or two uppercase
letters followed by a + or a - sign; then, "ABO" would be consid-
ered a syntactic outlier. (𝑖𝑖) Repeated Pattern Identification
singles out values that contain repeated patterns, such as
0101010101 in a 10-digit phone number, or "blablabla" in a
text attribute.

• Second, in numerical attributes, statistical outliers can be
found by leveraging common outlier detection methods [16].
This allows to identify as DMVs, numerical values that do
not fit the extent of the other values, e.g., negative values in
a distance attribute.

Efficiently identifying disguised nulls in heterogeneous text data

Figure 1: Sample ConnectionLens graph.

• Finally, some inlier DMVs, called Random DMVs in [21]
can be identified. These are legal attribute values, which
do not stand out as outliers; they are the hardest to find
even for an application domain specialist. The "Alabama"
example from Section 1 is a typical example. Inlier DMVs are
detected in [21] under the MAR and MCAR hypotheses; the
authors state that detecting DMVs under the NMAR model
is hard to impossible. The intuition being exploited is that
DMVs are frequent values (because the lack of information
is assumed to occur more frequently than an actual, correct
value). Thus, one must find amongst the most frequent val-
ues, those which are DMVs. To this purpose, each frequent
value is successively replaced by an actual null. If, by do-
ing this, the (original and introduced) null values follow the
MAR or MCAR models, then we consider that value as a
good DMV candidate. Then, the MEUS method from [17] is
applied to each candidate to detect the DMVs.

The FAHES team has developed a tool using these methods to detect
all three types of DMV in a relational database.

Finding disguised nulls is one among the many problems raised
by poor data quality, problems which have been traditionally ad-
dressed through data cleaning. Data quality raises many real prob-
lems, which to this day still needs solutions, Traditional approaches
for data cleaning were rule-base [13, 14, 22]. Newer techniques are
now based on machine learning approaches, e.g., [18]. Our work is
part of this effort to improve data quality. Disguised null detection
can be seen as a data cleaning task; it is also related to data profil-
ing [1], since DMV detection also allows to characterize a certain
attribute (set of nodes) by the percentage of their values which are
disguised nulls.

3 MOTIVATING EXAMPLE
We loaded 400.000 PubMed bibliographic notices in a Connec-
tionLens graph, out of which we extracted (paper ID, conflict of
interest statement) pairs. These CoI statements cover any kind
of benefits (funding, personal fees etc.) that authors report with
various organizations such as companies, foundations etc.

In Figure 1, "Dr. Alice consults for ABCPharma" (in the upper
left) is such a conflict of interest, part of the XML bibliographic

notice; "Dr. Alice thanks HealthStar... this article" (at the top right)
is another one. PubMed data originates from various biomedical
journals. Some do not provide CoI information; in this case, the CoI
is an empty string. Others provide a default disguised null value,
e.g., "The authors report no conflict". Finally, some journals only
allow free text, leading to a large variety of disguised nulls.

ConnectionLens extracts named entities from all text nodes, re-
gardless of the data source they come from, using trained language
models. In the figure, blue, green, and orange nodes denote Orga-
nization, Location, and Person entities, respectively. Each entity
node is connected to the text node it has been extracted from, by an
extraction edge, which also records the confidence (between 0 and1)
of the extractor. Finally, nodes are compared to find that some may
be equivalent (solid red edges) or similar(dashed red edges).The
original motivation of this work was to avoid connecting, by such
equivalence or similarity edges, two identical or similar values,if
one of them is a disguised null, since this would lead to paths in
the graph that have no meaning.

Furthermore, extracting entities is really time consuming and
with disguised null values, we are extracting entities over values
we cannot exploit, thus losing time unnecessarily.

4 DETECTING DISGUISED NULLS WITH

ENTITY PROFILES

ConnectionLens [5–7, 10] integrates heterogeneous data into a
graph. Figure 1 (reused from [5]) illustrates this in a data journal-
ism scenario proposed by investigative journalists with whom we
collaborate: we integrate four datasets (delimited by gray areas)
in order to build a comprehensive database of information about
conflicts of interest in the biomedical domain. In this example, we
use a PubMed XML bibliographic notice, the corresponding med-
ical article (in PDF) transformed into a JSON document, an RDF
fragment from Wikidata, and an HTML page such as those set
up by journalists on TobaccoTactics, DesmogBlog etc., to share
information about organizations such as industry lobby groups.

After inspecting DS3 and trying to find what distinguishes an
actual conflict of interest (CoI, in short) from a disguised null, we
made the following observation. An actual CoI (such as those in-
volving Alice in Figure 1) is either of the form "Researcher A was
funded by B", or of the form "The authors acknowledge funding
from C". Thus, a person name may be present (in other cases, we
just find "The authors"), but an organization is always involved.
Thus, we can say that the entity profile of a CoI is: it must contain
at least an organization.

This leads to the following disguised null detection method:

• Extract all named entities from the CoI strings (through

regular ConnectionLens data ingestion);

• Declare those CoI strings in which no Organization entity

was found, as disguised nulls.

The accuracy of this method is exactly that of the entity extractor;
it has been shown in [3, 4] (for English) and in [5] (for French) that
the accuracy is quite high. Its drawback is that extracting entities
from all CoI strings is very lengthy. This motivates the search for
a faster technique, which, on one hand, could identify the DMVs,
while at the same time also reducing the entity extraction (thus,
the actual ConnectionLens graph creation) time.

In practice, of course, we only extract entities once from each
distinct string. It turns out that DS3 had a high number of duplicates
(especially some very popular disguised nulls). Removing dupli-
cates from DS3 leads to a new dataset we denote DDS3, consisting
of 82.388 values. We use this de-duplicated dataset for the DMV
detection methods described below.

5 DISGUISED NULL DETECTION THROUGH

EMBEDDING AND CLASSIFICATION

With entity extraction, we have a good method to detect disguised
nulls. However, this method is very time-consuming, so we need
to find a faster method.

Our initial approach has been to cluster the values, in order to
obtain DMV cluster(s) separated from non-DMV clusters. In partic-
ular, we experimented with the K-means [16] algorithm, setting the
number of clusters to 10. We could indeed see that DMVs "mostly"
clustered together, but the separation was not very good.

Thus, we looked for an alternative method. Our idea is: we could
extract entities from a small part of the data, then train a Machine
Learning model to recognize DMVs (based on the method from the
previous section), and finally use this model to predict whether a
yet-unseen value is a DMV or not.

5.1 Textual data representation
To classify our string (text) values, we needed to represent them as
multi-dimensional numeric vectors. First, we apply a set of common
text pre-processing: suppressing punctuation, normalization and
stemming.

Then, we need to project the pre-processed texts in a multidi-
mensional space. Many techniques can be used for this purpose.
Transformers like BERT [12] have been proven really efficient for
many Natural Language Programming (NLP). However, experi-
menting with BERT and similar tools has shown that obtaining a
sentence embedding [23] is time-consuming, which does not suit
our time saving objective.

Instead, we opted for the well-known TF-IDF (Term-Frequency -
Inverse-Document-Frequency) representation, commonly used in
Natural Language Processing. TF-IDF weights term frequencies in
each document according to the frequency of the term across the
corpus. Intuitively, TF denotes that if a word occurs many times
in a document, its relevance should be boosted as it must be more
meaningful as it appears frequently. Conversely, IDF stands for the
fact that if the word appears frequently in many documents, then
it is just a frequent word and its relevance should be decreased. We
finally keep only the top 20.000 terms with highest TF-IDF score to
reduce dimensions.

5.2 Classification model
To classify texts as DMVs or non-DMVs, we decided to rely on a
Random Forests classifier [9]. These classifiers are not the fastest,
but they are quite efficient over complex data. Other classifiers
might work as well; our goal here is to investigate whether the
above approach, which trains the classifier on extraction results,
can provide a more efficient DMV detection method, by avoiding
to extract entities from a certain part of the input.

As we show in Section 6.5, this is indeed the case; even for small
training set sizes (that is, even if entities are fully extracted only

Théo Bouganim

★

★
Helena Galhardas† Ioana Manolescu

from a small part of the data), the classifier learns to predict quite
accurately DMVs, while sparing significant entity extraction time.

Figure 2: DMVs and the scope of each DMV technique

5.3 Discussion
Our methods detect types of DMVs that are different from the ones
detected by FAHES. Figure 2 represents a diagram showing how
each method detects DMVs. FAHES techniques work better over
structured data, whereas our techniques work over free-texts. Here
we will detail with examples what DMVs or wrongly detected DMVs
are in each part of the diagram:

(1) Correctly detected statistical outliers, e.g.: In a human heights

attribute, a height of 3 meters.

(2) Wrongly detected statistical outliers, e.g.: In a dataset con-
taining salaries of the employees of a company, if the CEO
salary is 10 times higher than any of his employees, this
could be wrongly detect as a DMV.

(3) Correctly detected syntactic ouliers, e.g.: In a blood type

attribute, the value ’ABO’.

(4) Wrongly detected syntactic outlier, e.g.: In a name attribute,
François-Noël which is a composed name is detected as syn-
tactic outlier because of the ’-’, whereas it is a valid name.
(5) Correctly detected Random DMVs, e.g.: A default value such
as Alabama for a state, detected thanks to the MEUS tech-
nique.

(6) A DMV can be at the same time a syntactic outlier, a random
DMV and a statistical outlier, e.g., a default distance value of
-1.

(7) Wrongly detected random DMVs. In a poll where we ask for
favourite colors, blue might come really often. Lacking corre-
lation with other attributes, blue could be wrongly detected
as a random DMV.

(8) Correctly detected DMV with entity profile technique, e.g.:
In a conflict of interest paragraph : "The authors report no
conflict of interest."

(9) Wrongly detected DMV with entity profile technique. These
are errors of the entity extractor when it misses an organi-
zation.

Efficiently identifying disguised nulls in heterogeneous text data

(10) Correctly detected DMV with the classification method that
was not detected by the entity extraction method. For exam-
ple, in ’John McDonalds declares no conflict of interest’, the
entity extractor could detect McDonalds as an Organisation,
and classify the value as an actual CoI instead of a DMV.
(11) Wrongly detected DMV with the classification method, these

are errors of the classifier.

(12) Most of the DMV detected by the entity profile technique

are as well detected by the classification technique.

6 EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION
We now describe performance-oriented experiments with the dis-
guised null detection techniques described above.

6.1 Datasets
To conduct our experiments, we have built three ConnectionLens
graphs out of real-world datasets:

(1) We have loaded the most complete HATVP XML trans-
parency dataset (35MB), with data about 270.000 people, in a
ConnectionLens graph. From this, we extracted the montant
(monetary amount) fields which appeared to contain many
disguised nulls1.

(2) We loaded a smaller HATVP CSV dataset (2.1 MB), contain-
ing information about 9.000 people; this dataset is relational-
looking, which simplifies processing it through FAHES.
(3) We loaded 400.000 PubMed bibliographic notices in a
graph, out of which we extracted (paper ID, conflict of inter-
est statement) pairs. These CoI statements cover any kind of
benefits (funding, personal fees etc.) that authors report with
various organizations such as companies, foundations etc. In
Figure 1, "Dr. Alice consults for ABCPharma" (in the upper
left) is such a conflict of interest, part of the XML biblio-
graphic notice; "Dr. Alice thanks HealthStar... this article" (at
the top right) is another one. PubMed data originates from
various medical journals. Some do not provide CoI informa-
tion; in this case, the CoI is an empty string. Others provide
a default disguised null value, e.g., "The authors report no
conflict". Finally, some journals only allow free text, leading
to a large variety of disguised nulls. We will denote these
datasets DS1, DS2 and DS3, respectively.

6.2 Settings
All experiments were performed on a MacBook Pro 16 inches from
2019, with a 2.4 GHz Intel Core i9 8-core processor and 32 GB
2667 MHz DDR4 memory. We used ConnectionLens2 to build the
graphs, including in particular the extraction of named entities
using Flair [3, 4], which we had retrained for French [7]. Connec-
tionLens graphs are stored in Postgres 9.6; experiment code was
written in Python 3.6.

6.3 Null detection through FAHES
We have appplied FAHES [21] on the three datasets described pre-
viously. Next we will comment on the results obtained by the null
detection through FAHES.

1The transparency entry forms require filling in the worth of participations or owner-
ships in various companies; companies which have closed or did not make benefits, or
pro-bono activity, lead to disguised nulls.
2Available from https://gitlab.inria.fr/cedar/connectionlens

Table 1: Entity extraction method times

Values Total characters Extraction times (s)
56
669
1.320
2.175
2.620

163.203
1.604.141
3.281.345
5.000.364
6.728.493

500
5.000
10.000
15.000
20.000

DS1 Among the 270.000 values of the numeric amount attribute,
FAHES correctly found the disguised null 0 (45.000 occurrences) as
Random DMVs (Inliers). It also detected 372.2196 (4 occurrences) as
a numerical outlier DMV; this is wrong. All the amount values are
numbers, and as far as we could see, there are no other disguised
nulls.

DS2 In this relational dataset, in an attribute entitled filename,
FAHES identified correctly the disguised null dispense (120 occur-
rences) as a Random DMV. Then, FAHES identified wrongly other
values as being disguised nulls, in all cases as Syntactic Outliers
DMV. The values falsely flagged as disguised nulls are:

• François-Noël (3 occurrences) in the attribute given name;
• BÉRIT-DÉBAT (6 occurrences) and KÉCLARD-MONDÉSIR (3)

in the attribute name;

• di (4480 occurrences) in the attribute document type; this is

the acronym for déclaration d’intérêt;

• 2A and 2B as departement numbers; they are, in fact, correct

numbers of French departments in Corsica;

• four distinct, correct URLs within the photo_url attribute,
probably because their structure did not ressemble the oth-
ers’.

DS2 seems to include no other disguised nulls.

Results on DS3 Out of the 400.000 values, FAHES correctly iden-
tified The authors have declared that no competing interests exist
(31.891 occurrences) as a Random DMV. However, visual inspection
exhibited many other disguised nulls (we will revisit this below). FA-
HES fails to find them because freely written texts rarely coincide,
thus FAHES’ statistical approach based on value frequencies con-
siders many disguised nulls rare (thus non-null), which is wrong.

Experiment conclusion FAHES [21] performs quite well with
numbers but is less convincing when it handles textual data. Indeed,
DMVs detected as Syntactic outliers are often false positives. With
a bit of domain knowledge it is possible to manually discard these
DMVs, however, it shows the limits of the methods used to detect
DMVs as syntactic outliers. FAHES has also shown its limitations
by missing many DMVs on long free text data, which shows the
need of new methods to treat these cases.

6.4 Disguised null detection through entity

profiles

To measure performances of the entity profiles technique, we per-
formed 5 experiments with respectively the 500, 5.000, 10.000,
15.000 and 20.000 first values of dataset DDS3 (introduced at the
end of Section 4). The objective here is to measure the extraction
time as a function of the input size; this gives an indication of
the time needed to extract disguised nulls using the Entity Profile

Table 2: Impact of training set size over the performances of
disguised null detection

Values in Training-set
Extraction Times (s)
Training Times (s)
Prediction Times (s)
Total Times (s)
Precision
Recall
F1-score

16.477
2.153
54
10
2.217
0,939
0,948
0,943

8.238
1.075
23
10
1.108
0,933
0,946
0,940

823
108
6
11
125
0,885
0,942
0,913

method. We present the results in Table 1. We observe that extract-
ing entities is time consuming and that the extraction time is almost
linear to the number of values. For the complete dataset DDS3, we
can expect to have an extraction time around 11.000 seconds (183
minutes), which is quite lengthy.

6.5 Disguised null detection through
embedding and classification

The most common training-test split method consists on separating
the dataset with 20% used for training and 80% for testing. We know
that in our case, the most time-consuming operation is to label the
training set with the entity extraction technique. To gain time, we
want thus to reduce the training set.

To evaluate the impact of the training set size on the performance
of the model used to detect disguised nulls over DDS3, we have
performed 3 experiments. We trained models with respectively
20% (16477 values), 10% (8238 values) and 1% (823 values) of the
dataset and report the comparison of the performances of each
model in Table 2. In this table, the precision, recall (and thus also
F1) are computed using the result of the entity profile method
(Section 4) as gold standard; as we have seen, it is a time-consuming
technique. Table 2 shows that we can attain very good precision,
even if the model is trained on a small part of the dataset, while
saving significant amounts of time. In the context of our project,
recall is more important than precision, since decreasing recall
means losing valuable information (potential CoIs) while decreasing
precision means extracting entities from useless values (strings
which do not contain any), thus losing some time. Our experiments
show that in our problem, recall is less sensitive than precision to
the reduction of the training-set size which suits our purpose.

With respect to our motivating example, building the graph
for DDS3 took around 11.000 seconds. Using our method with a
training-set of 1% of the values (823 values) takes now the time
to predict on which values we have to apply the extractor (125
seconds), to which we add the time to extract the valuable values.
We have found on our dataset that there are around 45.000 valuable
values. We need 5.900 seconds to extract those. That brings us to
a total of 6.000 seconds to build our graph instead of 11.000
seconds previously without losing much information.
7 CONCLUSION
In this work, we exposed the limits of the existing DMV techniques
with textual and heterogeneous data. A first technique we studied
is to extract entities from each value of the database and exploit
so-called entity profiles (expected entities in a non-null value) to
identify disguised nulls. While highly accurate, this is expensive

Théo Bouganim

★

★
Helena Galhardas† Ioana Manolescu

time-wise, because of the extraction. For efficiency, instead, we
trained a classification model (Random Forest), only with partial
samples of our dataset, labeled it with entity profiles, and predict
(classify) the other values as DMVs or not. This technique saves
significant extraction time, while also having very good accuracy.
As part of our future work, we could also try to optimize the
hyper-parameters of the classification model, in order to further
increase its performance.

REFERENCES
[1] Ziawasch Abedjan, Lukasz Golab, Felix Naumann, and Thorsten Papenbrock.

Data Profiling. Morgan and Claypool, 2020.

[2] Serge Abiteboul, Richard Hull, and Victor Vianu. Foundations of Databases.

Addison-Wesley, 1995.

[3] Alan Akbik, Tanja Bergmann, Duncan Blythe, Kashif Rasul, Stefan Schweter, and
Roland Vollgraf. Flair: An easy-to-use framework for state-of-the-art NLP. In
ACL, 2019.

[4] Alan Akbik, Duncan Blythe, and Roland Vollgraf. Contextual string embeddings

for sequence labeling. In ACL, 2018.

[5] Angelos Christos Anadiotis, Oana Balalau, Catarina Conceicao, Helena Gal-
hardas, Mhd Yamen Haddad, Ioana Manolescu, Tayeb Merabti, and Jingmao You.
Graph integration of structured, semistructured and unstructured data for data
journalism. Information Systems, 2021.

[6] Angelos-Christos G. Anadiotis, Oana Balalau, Théo Bouganim, Francesco Chimi-
enti, Helena Galhardas, Mhd Yamen Haddad, Stephane Horel, Ioana Manolescu,
and Youssr Youssef. Empowering investigative journalism with graph-based
heterogeneous data management. IEEE Data Engineering Bulletin, September
2021.

[7] Oana Balalau, Catarina Conceição, Helena Galhardas, Ioana Manolescu, Tayeb
Merabti, Jingmao You, and Youssr Youssef. Graph integration of structured,
semistructured and unstructured data for data journalism. BDA, October 2020.
[8] Raphaël Bonaque, Tien Duc Cao, Bogdan Cautis, François Goasdoué, Javier Lete-
lier, Ioana Manolescu, Oscar Mendoza, Swen Ribeiro, Xavier Tannier, and Michaël
Thomazo. Mixed-instance querying: a lightweight integration architecture for
data journalism. In VLDB, 2016.

[9] Leo Breiman. Random forests. Machine learning, 45(1):5–32, 2001.
[10] Camille Chanial, Rédouane Dziri, Helena Galhardas, Julien Leblay, Minh-
Huong Le Nguyen, and Ioana Manolescu. ConnectionLens: Finding connections
across heterogeneous data sources (demonstration). PVLDB (also at BDA), 11(12),
2018.

[11] Edgar F. Codd. A relational model of data for large shared data banks. Commu-

nications of the ACM, 13, June 1970.

[12] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-
training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In ACL,
2019.

[13] Helena Galhardas, Daniela Florescu, Dennis E. Shasha, and Eric Simon. Declara-
tively cleaning your data with AJAX. In Anne Doucet, editor, BDA, 2000.
[14] Helena Galhardas, Daniela Florescu, Dennis E. Shasha, Eric Simon, and Cristian-
Augustin Saita. Declarative data cleaning: Language, model, and algorithms. In
VLDB, 2001.

[15] Joachim Hammer, Hector Garcia-Molina, Kelly Ireland, Yannis Papakonstantinou,
Jeffrey D. Ullman, and Jennifer Widom. Information translation, mediation, and
mosaic-based browsing in the TSIMMIS system. In SIGMOD, 1995.

[16] Jiawei Han, Micheline Kamber, and Jian Pei. Data Mining Concepts and Techniques.

Morgan Kaufmann, 2011.

[17] Ming Hua and Jian Pei. Cleaning disguised missing data: A heuristic approach.

In SIGKDD, 2007.

[18] Ihab F. Ilyas and Mohamed A. Soliman. Probabilistic Ranking Techniques in Rela-
tional Databases. Synthesis Lectures on Data Management. Morgan & Claypool
Publishers, 2011.

[19] Roderick JA Little and Donald B Rubin. Statistical analysis with missing data,

volume 793. John Wiley & Sons, 1987. First edition.

[20] Ronald K. Pearson. The problem of disguised missing data. SIGKDD Explor.

Newsl., 8(1):83–92, June 2006.

[21] Abdulhakim A. Qahtan, Ahmed Elmagarmid, Raul Castro Fernandez, Mourad
Ouzzani, and Nan Tang. Fahes: A robust disguised missing values detector. In
SIGKDD, 2018.

[22] Vijayshankar Raman and Joseph M. Hellerstein. Potter’s wheel: An interactive

data cleaning system. In VLDB, 2001.

[23] Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. Sentence-BERT: Sentence embeddings using

siamese bert-networks. In EMNLP, 2019.

