Temporal models of care sequences for the exploration
of medico-administrative data
Johanne Bakalara

To cite this version:

Johanne Bakalara. Temporal models of care sequences for the exploration of medico-administrative
data. AIME 2019 - 17th Conference on Artificial Intelligence in Medicine, Jun 2019, Poznan, Poland.
pp.1-7. ￿hal-02265731￿

HAL Id: hal-02265731

https://hal.science/hal-02265731

Submitted on 12 Aug 2019

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

Temporal models of care sequences for the
exploration of medico-administrative data

Johanne Bakalara1,2

1 Univ Rennes, Inria, CNRS, IRISA, France
2 Univ Rennes, EA-7449 REPERES, France

Abstract. Pharmacoepidemiology with medico-administrative databa-
ses enables to study health products impact in real-life settings. However,
querying this data in a medical perspective is still a challenge because of
the complexity of temporal constraints for medical patterns. This PhD
thesis aims at proposing a formal framework for the analysis of temporal
medical patterns that would support a well-founded tool for querying
care trajectories. This paper presents our problematic and introduce a
use-case which illustrates the comparison of several querying formalisms.

Keywords: Temporal logics · Ontologies · pharmacoepidemiology.

1 Introduction

Pharmacoepidemiology studies the beneﬁts and risks of drugs usage on popu-
lation in real life settings. As such, pharmacoepidemiology deals with positive
impact as well as safety concerns. Patients with health events are identiﬁed ac-
cording to their individual characteristics, their treatments and their concomi-
tant treatments. Collecting information to answer one speciﬁc epidemiological
question requires a lot of time and is very expensive. Using medico-administrative
databases is an attractive potential alternative because of their large population
coverage and their availability. For instance, the SNDS3 database contains indi-
vidual information of French patients: age, sex, location; and health reimburse-
ment information: drug deliveries, medical acts or medical visits and hospital-
isations (date of arrival, leaving date, diagnosis code) but it does not contain
medical reports. The interest of using this medico-administrative database has
been demonstrated by the suspension of benﬂuorex [19].

Epidemiologists use the SNDS database to ﬁnd patients that experienced
some medical events of interest. All the medical events that are stored in the
database compose the care trajectory of a patient. For epidemiologists, the chal-
lenge is to deﬁne selection criteria that would reconcile those actual patient in-
formation with the medical semantic. The deﬁnition of these criteria composes a
health pattern called care pathway. For example, the care trajectory of a patient
“delivery at date t of anticoagulant with ATC code B01AF01 ” would match the

3 SNDS: French National System for Health Data (previously SNIIRAM).

2

J. Bakalara

care pathway “patients exposed to anticoagulant for 3 to 6 months under the
assumption of a monthly delivery”.

The problem that we address is to enable epidemiologists to query the data-

base of care trajectories with care pathways. The complexity is twofold:

– use of ontological concepts (“Doppler imagery act”/“anticoagulant”/“vascu-
lar specialist”): the code of the medical act performed on a patient is given,
but is more precise than the criterion “anticoagulant drug” and symbolic
domain knowledge is required to reconcile both. Here ,“Anticoagulant” refers
to a class of drugs that is described in the ATC taxonomy.4

– use of temporal constraints (“in the week after”/“within 4 months”): the
temporal order of cares, numerical duration/delays speciﬁes the temporal
organisation of the events.

2 Problem statement

The objective of this work is to propose a formal framework that would support
a well-founded and eﬃcient tool for querying care trajectories in the context of
pharmacoepidemiology.

Generally speaking, let T = (Ti)i∈[n] be a set of n care trajectories and ϕ
a care pathway abstract description. ϕ holds in a care trajectory T ∈ T , de-
noted T |= ϕ, iﬀ the care trajectory veriﬁes the care pathway. The formalisation
problem is threefold, we deﬁne:

– a formalism to model care trajectories, T , which represent the SDNS data
– a formalism to model care pathways, ϕ, which speciﬁes an abstract care

pathway

– a computational model that can evaluate whether T entails ϕ: T |= ϕ.

As we noticed in the introduction, specifying care pathways requires to ma-
nipulate: temporal concepts (time constraints and time window), medical con-
cepts and knowledge (ontologies). The ideal formal framework should capture
these dimensions, enable intuitive queries to be expressed for a wide range of
pharmacoepidemiological studies and be computationally eﬃcient.

It is of paramount importance to base choices on solid theoretical foundations.
Expressiveness and eﬃciency are known to be antagonist objectives [12]. A well-
founded approach would be the basis for proposing long-term solutions, make
possible future improvements and facilitate its application to a broad range of
contexts (i.e., various databases, queries).

3 Related works

This section presents four families of formalisms related to the problem: model
checking; Complex Event Processing (CEP); temporal databases; and Knowledge

4 ATC: Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical Classiﬁcation System.

Temporal models of care sequences

3

Representation and Reasoning (KR). The formalism should represent data (care
trajectories), query (care pathway) and compute the answers of the queries on
data. The last two families have been further explored in medical context [8]
than the two others.

Model checking [7] veriﬁes if a model satisﬁes a property or a formula. This
research line is interested in representing dynamic systems with formal temporal
formalisms (discrete event models, M, describing how the system evolves) to
prove some properties speciﬁed by formula ϕ. A formula ϕ is true iﬀ ϕ is true for
any trace that can be generated from model M. The most common formalisms
for timed formula in Model Checking are LTL, CTL or MTL (temporal LTL).

To apply such methods in our context, the events of care trajectory are
represented by one ﬁnite trace of the system (and there is no system model in
our case) and the care pathway is represented by a timed logic formula. The
care trajectory is selected iﬀ the trace satisﬁes the formula. These methods are
interesting because they provide formal results (expressiveness, completeness,
equivalences) on the representation of timed systems, but they neither manage
reasoning nor ontological representation. In the medical domain, model checking
has been used to study the compliance of care pathways [5].

Complex Event Processing (CEP)

[11] is a research line that aims at
processing log-streams with patterns. Log-streams are streams or sequences of
timed events. The CEP processes these logs to detect or to locate complex events
(or patterns) deﬁned by the user. This domain deﬁnes formalisms that aim at be-
ing very eﬃcient to process streams and expressive to specify patterns. Temporal
constraint networks [6] or Chronicles [10] are simple temporal models that are
interesting for their graphical representation, but are limited to simple events.
Some more complex formalisms, e.g. ETALIS [1] or logic-based event recognition
[11] propose very expressive representations of complex events, including reason-
ing techniques (encompassing ontologies) which enrich the CEP capabilities.

In our context, care trajectories are logs, and care pathways are the complex
events. We are not interested in the stream dimension, but their formalisms to
represent complex events can be adapted in the context of static logs.

Temporal databases [18] extend the notion of database to timestamped
data. Databases cover data representation problems but also speciﬁc querying
language problems. This family encompasses the temporal extension of relational
databases (e.g. TSQL) but also Semantic Web approaches which combine query
languages (e.g. SPARQL) and expressive description languages. Care trajectories
are facts in the temporal database and the querying of care pathways becomes a
problem of specifying care pathways in the query language. [17] shown that the
Semantic Web is a relevant approach for our problem, but does not explicitly
address the problem of timed queries.

Finally, Knowledge Representation and Reasoning (KR) [12] is “the
study of how what we know can at the same time be represented as compre-
hensibly as possible and reasoned with as eﬀectively as possibly”. In this re-
search domain, temporal KR is focused on representing and reasoning about
time. It gives rise to several logics [13], for instance: Allen’s logic, McDermott’s

4

J. Bakalara

logic, Event Calculus or Halpern & Shoham’s logic. KR is a general framework
to study how to represent care trajectories and how to model reasoning-based
queries on care pathways. Approaches from the other families may be repre-
sented with appropriate logics. Studying KR formalisms seems of paramount
importance as it provides common foundations to compare various approaches.
Description Logic (DL) [3] is a KR formalism allowing ontology-mediated query
answering (OMQA) [4]. Artale et al. [2] present a temporal extension of DL that
may be suitable for our problem. For instance, [16] developed a tool based on
OWL for research data management with a temporal reasoning in a clinical trial
system.

4 Comparison of approach on a use case

4.1 Rational

This section introduces a real use case. In this example, pharmacoepidemiolo-
gists want to select patients with Venous Thromboembolism (VTE) from the
data contained in the SNDS. Venous thromboembolism, i.e. deep vein throm-
bosis (DVT) or pulmonary embolism (PE), is a frequent and potentially fatal
disease [9, 14]. The motivation is to survey how many people are concerned,
if the number of patients increased and if a speciﬁc drug has an impact. The
diﬃculty for epidemiologists lies in the description of the care pathways that will
accurately identify VTE from the SNDS data. The description below describes
two care pathways that physicians proposed to identify VTE.

In clinical practice facing a clinical suspicion of VTE, physicians ﬁrst
prescribe anticoagulant and then conﬁrm or not the diagnosis through
speciﬁc medical acts: for instance Doppler ultrasonography or CT scan.
Patients with suspected PE are often hospitalized whereas patients with
suspected DVT are managed on a ambulatory basis. If the suspicion is
conﬁrmed, anticoagulant deliveries continues for 3 to 12 months or some-
times longer duration. Hence, diagnosis (through medical act) is preceded
or followed by anticoagulant initiation within a time window of at most
1 to 2 days, keeping in mind that PE suspicion leads to hospitalisation
during which medical act to conﬁrm the diagnosis are performed and then
anticoagulant is observed only after the patient comes back home.

Through these observations, pharmacoepidemiologists identiﬁed the following
two care pathways to detect patients with VTE from SNDS data:

1. A diagnosis (DVT or PE) or a medical act (Doppler or CT scan) during or
prior to anticoagulant (AC) deliveries for 1 to 2 days and delivery lasts a
minimum of 3 months and a maximum of 12 months (sometimes longer).
Each delivery is separated by 0 to 2 months.

2. A diagnosis PE during an hospitalisation followed by AC delivery.

These care pathways are ordered and also contain time constraints between
events (for instance number of days) or duration of events (time window). Search-
ing for such patterns requires high expressiveness that make databases query

Temporal models of care sequences

5

B01AF 01 (cid:118) B01AF
B01AF (cid:118) B01
B01 (cid:118) B

Fig. 2. TBox

B01(Pierre, n1) B01(Pierre, n2)
P E(Pierre, n3) B01AF 01(Paul, n1)
B01AF 01(Paul, n3) EDQM 001(Paul, n4)
n1 < n2 < n3 < n4

Fig. 1. ABox

[0,60]

[0,60]

[-92,1]

D

D

D

VTE

(♦D ∧ (cid:13)(♦D) ∧ (cid:13)(♦D)) ∧ (♦(DV T ∨ P E))

♦(DV T ∨ P E) ⇒ ((♦[0 24]D) ∧ (♦[0 60]D) ∧ (♦[0 60]D) ∧ (♦≥365 ((cid:3)(¬D)))

Fig. 3. Example of care pathway representation of the case study in three formalisms.
Top left: Chronicles, top right: LTL formula and bottom: MTL formula (D denotes an
anticoagulant delivery event).

languages (SQL, TSQL) practically diﬃcult to use. The next section illustrates
formalisms that will allow the generalization of the representation of care path-
ways and care trajectories.

Note that this use case illustrates the problem of formalizing care pathways
of patients suﬀering from VTE. But, for sake of generality, our formalism has to
specify the care pathway patterns of a broad range of care studies.

4.2 Comparison of diﬀerent models

This section illustrates several formalisms: Description Logic (DL) to represent
care trajectories and Chronicles, LTL and MTL to express queries. These queries
represent care pathways. We discuss their expressivity in our use case.

DL is used to describe and to reason about concepts on data. The ﬁrst one
consists in deﬁning the data and the data form (called ABox ) which contains
knowledge at the instance level: a set of assertion deﬁning concepts, roles and
a countably inﬁnite set of individuals names. Concepts with individuals names
and roles with individuals names are forming atoms.

The second step is to deﬁne a base of knowledge (TBox ) which is a set of con-
cepts inclusions. For instance, the concept B01AF 01 (Rivaroxaban) representing
anticoagulant drugs is the leaf concept in the hierarchy of concept modeling the
ATC classiﬁcation: B01AF (Direct Xa inhibitor), B01 (Antithrombotic agents)
and B (Blood and blood forming organs).

Considering the CCAM (medical acts) code for the Doppler: EDQM 001
(iliac and lower limb arteries), we could construct the ABox of Fig. 4.2, where
Pierre and Paul are patients and ni are dates of medical events. TBox of Fig. 4.2
is issued from the previous ATC classiﬁcation.

The third step is to deﬁne a query to extract information from knowledge
contained in ABox and TBox. Usually, queries are expressed with a ﬁrst order
logic. [2] designed a temporal DL: TQL that extends the standard ontology lan-
guage: OWL 2QL. However, to express queries with temporal delays, several

6

J. Bakalara

formalisms seem to be adapted. For example, the chronicle formalism represents
a care pathway as a temporal constraint graph. Chronicles allow the expression
of sequential order of events with temporal constraints such as interval of time.
Furthermore, negative time in the interval expresses that an event may occur
before or after another one. Fig. 3 speciﬁes patients having at least three AC
deliveries separated by 0 to 60 days, and a diagnosis DVT before, after or dur-
ing deliveries. DVT occurs 92 days earlier or one day after the third delivery.
However, we can not explicitly restrict the number of deliveries to 12 months as
deﬁned in the use case. We also can not use the notion of no event (event does
not occur).

Model checking oﬀer the possibility to express no event. Such as an example
we propose the LTL formula Fig. 3 as an example applied to our case of study:
The LTL formula represents a care pathway with at least three deliveries and a
diagnosis DVT or PE. We literally read it: in the future (♦), there is the delivery
of B01 and (∧) it is followed ((cid:13)), in the future, by the delivery of B01 and
it is followed, in the future, by a delivery of B01 and, in the future, there is
a DVT (or ∨) PE) diagnosis. LTL only contains ordered events and does not
contain time constraints. The expressivity of such formula is too limited for our
problemThe MTL formula adds the capability to express quantitative temporal
constraints. Fig. 3 is a MTL formula which represents a care pathway with a
DVT or PE followed by three AC deliveries separated between 0 to 60 days,
and no deliveries occur after 365 days. MTL can explicitly restrict the number
of deliveries and temporal constraints but the notion of sequences is manually
found by the multiple use of ♦.

From a computational aspect, chronicle recognition is a space/time-eﬃcient
task. Simple LTL formula would also be space/time-eﬃcient to check but it
is expressively poor. In contrast, MTL is more expressive but it is known to
be undecidable. This is a theoretical limitation but not necessarily a practical
constraint [15].

5 Conclusion

Current researches are based on comparing temporal models and on studying
their suitability for pharmacoepidemiology studies. Participating to this doc-
toral consortium would be an opportunity to discuss existing temporal model in
medical applications and to identify other similar use cases that will highlight
other needs. Expectation from the doctoral consortium is to guide me for the
future evolution of my thesis.

Acknowledgments This multidisciplinary PhD thesis began six months ago. It is
supervised by the pharmacoepidemiologist E. Oger in the REPERES team and
by computer scientists, T. Guyet and O. Dameron in the IRISA laboratory, and
A. Happe in the REPERES team.

Temporal models of care sequences

7

References

1. Anicic, D., Fodor, P., Rudolph, S., St¨uhmer, R., Stojanovic, N., Studer, R.:
ETALIS: Rule-based reasoning in event processing. In: Proc. Reasoning in event-
based distributed systems, pp. 99–124 (2011)

2. Artale, A., Kontchakov, R., Kovtunova, A., Ryzhikov, V., Wolter, F., Za-
kharyaschev, M.: Ontology-mediated query answering over temporal data: A sur-
vey. In: nternational Symposium on Temporal Representation and Reasoning
(TIME) (2017)

3. Baader, F., Calvanese, D., McGuinness, D., Patel-Schneider, P., Nardi, D.: The
description logic handbook: Theory, implementation and applications. Cambridge
university press (2003)

4. Bienvenu, M.: Ontology-mediated query answering: harnessing knowledge to get
more from data. In: Proceedings of the International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (IJCAI). pp. 4058–4061 (2016)

5. Bottrighi, A., Giordano, L., Molino, G., Montani, S., Terenziani, P., Torchio, M.:
Adopting model checking techniques for clinical guidelines veriﬁcation. Artiﬁcial
intelligence in medicine 48(1), 1–19 (2010)

6. Cabalar, P., Otero, R.P., Pose, S.G.: Temporal constraint networks in action. In:

ECAI. pp. 543–547 (2000)

7. Clarke Jr, E.M., Grumberg, O., Kroening, D., Peled, D., Veith, H.: Model checking

(2018)

8. Combi, C., Keravnou-Papailiou, E., Shahar, Y.: Temporal information systems in

medicine (2010)

9. Delluc, A., Ianotto, J.C., Tromeur, C., De Moreuil, C., Couturaud, F., Lacut,
K., Le Moigne, E., Louis, P., Thereaux, J., Metges, J.P., et al.: Real-world inci-
dence of cancer following a ﬁrst unprovoked venous thrombosis: Results from the
EPIGETBO study. Thrombosis research 164, 79–84 (2018)

10. Dousson, C., Le Maigat, P.: Chronicle recognition improvement using temporal

focusing and hierarchization. In: Proc. IJCAI. pp. 324–329 (2007)

11. Giatrakos, N., Artikis, A., Deligiannakis, A., Garofalakis, M.: Complex event recog-
nition in the big data era. In: Proc. VLDB Endow. vol. 10, pp. 1996–1999 (2017)
12. Levesque, H.J.: Knowledge representation and reasoning. Annual review of com-

puter science 1(1), 255–287 (1986)

13. Long, D.: A review of temporal logics. The Knowledge Engineering Review 4(2),

141–162 (1989)

14. Oger, E., EPI-GETBO: Incidence of venous thromboembolism: a community-based
study in western france. Thrombosis and haemostasis 83(05), 657–660 (2000)
15. Ouaknine, J., Worrell, J.: On the decidability of metric temporal logic. In: 20th
Annual IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Science (LICS’05). pp. 188–197
(2005)

16. O’Connor, M.J., Shankar, R.D., Parrish, D.B., Das, A.K.: Knowledge-data inte-
gration for temporal reasoning in a clinical trial system. International journal of
medical informatics 78, 77–85 (2009)

17. Rivault, Y., Dameron, O., Le Meur, N.: queryMed: Semantic Web functions for
linking pharmacological and medical knowledge to data. Bioinformatics (2019)

18. Snodgrass, R.T.: Temporal databases. In: Proc. IEEE computer (1986)
19. Weill, A., Pa¨ıta, M., Tuppin, P., Fagot, J.P., Neumann, A., Simon, D., Ricordeau,
P., Montastruc, J.L., Allemand, H.: Benﬂuorex and valvular heart disease: a cohort
study of a million people with diabetes mellitus. Pharmacoepidemiology and drug
safety 19(12), 1256–1262 (2010)

