Temporal models of care sequences for the exploration
of medico-administrative data
Johanne Bakalara, Thomas Guyet, Olivier Dameron, Emmanuel Oger, André

Happe

To cite this version:

Johanne Bakalara, Thomas Guyet, Olivier Dameron, Emmanuel Oger, André Happe. Temporal mod-
els of care sequences for the exploration of medico-administrative data. 2019 - Workshop IA&Santé,
PFIA, Jul 2019, Toulouse, France. pp.1-8. ￿hal-02265743￿

HAL Id: hal-02265743

https://hal.science/hal-02265743

Submitted on 12 Aug 2019

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

Temporal models of care sequences for the
exploration of medico-administrative data

Johanne Bakalara1,2, Thomas Guyet1, Olivier Dameron1
Emmanuel Oger2,3, André Happe2,4

1 UNIV RENNES, INRIA, CNRS, IRISA
2 UNIV RENNES, EA-7449 REPERES
3 CHU RENNES
4 CHRU BREST
johanne.bakalara@irisa.fr

Abstract : Pharmacoepidemiology with medico-administrative databases enables to study impact of health
products in real-life setting. These studies require to manipulate the raw data, the care trajectories, in order
to identify pieces of data that may witness the medical information that is looked for. The manipulation
can be seen as a querying process in which a query is a description of a medical pattern (e.g. occurrence of
illness) with the available raw features from care trajectories (e.g. occurrence of medical procedures, drug
deliveries, etc.). The more expressive is the querying process, the more accurate is the medical pattern search.
The temporal dimension of care trajectories is a potential information that may improve the description of
medical patterns. The objective of this work is to propose a formal framework that would design a well-
founded tool for querying care trajectories with temporal medical patterns. In this preliminary work, we
present the problematic and we introduce a use case which illustrates the comparison of several querying
formalisms.
Mots-clés : Temporal logics, Description logic, Ontologies, Pharmacoepidemiology, SNDS.

1 Introduction

Pharmacoepidemiology studies uses and effects of drugs on population in real life including
beneﬁts and risks. As such, pharmacoepidemiology deals with positive impact (i.e. preven-
tion of disease) as well as safety concerns. Patients with health events are identiﬁed, ac-
cording to their individual characteristics, their treatments and their concomitant treatments.
Collecting information to answer one epidemiological question requires a lot of time and is
very expensive.

Medico-administrative databases are a potential alternative which are attractive because
of their large population coverage and their availability. For instance, the SNDS1 (Tuppin
et al., 2017) database contains individual information of French patients: age, sex, location;
and health reimbursement information: drug deliveries, medical acts or medical visits and
hospitalisations (date of arrival, leaving date, diagnosis code) but it does not contain medical
reports.

The interest of using this medico-administrative database has been demonstrated by the
suspension of benﬂuorex (Weill et al., 2010). It was the ﬁrst large-scale pharmacoepidemiol-
ogy study in France that was possible thanks to information contained in the SNDS.

The study shows that diabetic patients exposed to Benﬂuorex have an higher risk of hospi-
talisation for heart disease than the unexposed diabetics in the following years. Epidemiolo-
gists use the SNDS database to ﬁnd patients that experienced some medical events of interest.
It is worth noticing that information has been collected for administrative purposes (care re-
imbursements), but not for medical ones. As a consequence, the medical content associated
with medical events is relatively poor.

1SNDS: French National System for Health Data (previously SNIIRAM). The SNDS is the world largest

medico-administrative database with a population coverage close to 99%.

IA & Santé 2019

Figure 1: Example of a care trajectory.

Figure 2: Example of a care pathway.

Let us consider a patient having a Venous Thromboembolism (VTE). The database does
not contain the information that the patient has the disease VTE. This information has to
be deduced from the information about its care deliveries. For instance, a consultation with
a vascular specialist and deliveries of anticoagulant drugs. These pieces of information are
available in the data in a structured format. Compared to medical record in hospital, the
SNDS database has less medical information, but it does not required sensitive text analysis.
All medical events that are stored in the database compose the care trajectory of a patient.
Figure 1 illustrates a care trajectory. The challenge of the epidemiologist is to deﬁne selection
criteria that would reconcile those actual patient information with the medical semantic. The
deﬁnition of these criteria composes a health pattern called care pathway illustrated Figure 2.
A possible care pathway of patients with VTE2 is a consultation with a vascular specialist or
at the hospital with an Doppler imagery act (CCAM3 EDQM001 code) followed by at least 3
deliveries of anticoagulant drugs within 4 months (with the ﬁrst delivery of anticoagulant
in the week after consultation/Doppler). The care trajectory denotes the actual medical
events stored in the database while a care pathway is a pattern of medical events that describe
the pathology proﬁle as illustrated on Figures respectively 1 and 2.

We aim at enabling epidemiologists to query the database of care trajectories with such

kind of complex descriptions of care pathway. The complexity is twofold:

• use of ontological concepts (Doppler imagery act/anticoagulant/vascular specialist):
the code of the medical act is given, but the code for anticoagulant drugs is not precisely
given. Anticoagulants refer to a class of drugs that is described in the ATC taxonomy.4

• use of temporal constraints (in the week after/within 4 months): the temporal order of
cares, numerical duration/delays speciﬁes the temporal organisation of the events.

Our work focuses on having expressive temporal constraints in the description of care
pathways. Temporal constraints enable to discriminate care trajectories of interest from care
trajectories with same events but presenting different delays (e.g. an Doppler imagery act
followed by an anticoagulant delivered several weeks later does not witness a VTE). This
may help to specify care pathways that match only the desired care trajectories. It is worth
noting that drugs deliveries, medical acts and hospital stays are available in the database with
timestamps.

The challenge we face is summed up in Figure 3. Care pathways are on the left side and
care trajectories are on the right side. The overall objective is to bridge the two sides. On
the top in red, epidemiologists formulates a medical hypothesis. In blue, at the second level,
epidemiologist describes care pathways with the available health information and a database
stores health information. In green, at the third level, data and queries are speciﬁed in a for-
malism. This latter has to express a maximum of information to represent the complexity of
the data (care trajectories) and of the care pathway. Green and blue levels are intertwined.
Today, the tools for querying SNDS (third level) lack of expressiveness and constraint epi-
demiologists for their speciﬁcation (SQL, SAS, etc...).

2This description is an illustration for pedagogical purposes, we refer to the use case for a medical description

of VTE.

3CCAM: Classiﬁcation Commune des Actes Médicaux
4ATC: Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical Classiﬁcation System.

01/01/201901/02/201901/03/2019DatesDoppler+drugdeliverydrugdeliverydrugdelivery11306090120Timeindaysmedicalvisitorvascularspecialistdrugexposure=4drugdeliveriesduring120days1Temporal models of care sequences

Question Idea

Reality

Medical pattern deﬁned with infor-
mation known by the database

Observed Data registered into Medi-
cal Database

Formalised Query ϕ

Formalised data T

Intertwining tools

Every patients which match with the query

T

|= ϕ

Figure 3: From medical study issue to the care trajectory querying

In this article, we show that the problem of querying patient care trajectories with temporal
medical patterns (the care pathways) may be addressed, sometimes only partially, by tools or
formalisms coming from different computer science ﬁelds: complex event processing, formal
reasoning, knowledge representation and database. In this preliminary work, our objective is
to identify strengths and weaknesses of these approaches.

In the next sections, we states formally of problem of querying a set of care pathways,
then Section 3 reviews related work. The last section illustrates some of approaches of the
related work on a case study.

2 Problem statement

The objective of this work is to propose a formal framework that would design a well-founded
and efﬁcient tool for querying care trajectories in the context of pharmacoepidemiology.

Generally speaking, let T = (Ti)i∈[n] be a set of n care trajectories and ϕ a care pathway
abstract description. ϕ holds in a care trajectory T ∈ T , denoted T |= ϕ, if and only if the
care trajectory contains the care pathway. The formalisation problem is threefold:

• deﬁne a formalism to model care trajectories, T , which represent the SDNS data

• deﬁne a formalism to model care pathways, ϕ, which speciﬁes an abstract care path-

ways

• deﬁne a computational model that can evaluate whether T entails ϕ: T |= ϕ.

As we noticed in the introduction, specifying care pathways requires to manipulate: tem-
poral concepts (time constraints and time window), medical concepts and knowledge (ontolo-
gies). The ideal formal framework should capture these dimensions, enable intuitive queries
to be expressed for a wide range of pharmacoepidemiological studies and be computationally
efﬁcient.

It is of paramount importance to base choices on solid theoretical foundations. Expressive-
ness and efﬁciency are known to be antagonist objectives (Levesque, 1986). A well-founded
approach would be the basis for proposing long-term solutions, make possible future im-
provements and facilitate its application to a broad range of contexts (i.e., various databases,
queries).

IA & Santé 2019

3 Related work

This section presents four families of formalisms to answer the problem: model checking;
Complex Event Processing (CEP); temporal databases; and Knowledge Representation and
Reasoning (KR). The work that we mentioned addresses the three problems mentioned in
Section 2 at the same time. The formalism should represent data (care trajectories), query
(care pathway) and to compute the answers of the queries on data. The last two families have
been more explored in medical context (Combi et al., 2010) than the two others.

Model checking (Clarke Jr et al., 2018) veriﬁes if a model satisﬁes a property or a for-
mula. This research line is interested in representing dynamic systems with formal temporal
formalisms (discrete event models, M, describing how the system evolves) to prove some
properties speciﬁed by formula ϕ. A formula ϕ is true if and only if ϕ is true for any traces
5 that can be generated from the model M. The most common formalisms for formula in
Model Checking are LTL (Linear Temporal Logic), CTL (computation tree logic) or MTL
(metric temporal lgic) which is the temporal extension of LTL.

To apply such methods in our context, the events of care trajectory are represented by one
ﬁnite trace of the system (and there is no system model in our case) and the care pathways
is represented by a temporal logic formula. The care trajectory is selected if and only if the
trace satisﬁes the formula. These methods are interesting because they provide formal results
(expressiveness, completeness, equivalences) on the representation of timed systems, but they
don’t manage neither reasoning nor ontological representation. In related medical domain,
model checking has been used to study the compliance of care pathways (Bottrighi et al.,
2010).

Complex Event Processing (CEP) (Giatrakos et al., 2017) is a research line that aims at
processing log-streams with patterns. Log-streams are streams or sequences of timed events.
The CEP processes these logs to detect or to locate complex events (or patterns) deﬁned by
the user. This domain deﬁnes formalisms that aim at being very efﬁcient to process streams
and expressive to specify patterns. Temporal constraint networks (Cabalar et al., 2000) or
Chronicles (Dousson & Le Maigat, 2007) are simple temporal models that are interesting for
their graphical representation, but are limited to simple relational events. Some more complex
formalisms, e.g. ETALIS (Anicic et al., 2011) or logic-based event recognition (Giatrakos
et al., 2017), propose very expressive representations of complex events, including reasoning
techniques (including ontologies) which enrich the capabilities of CEP.

In our context, care trajectories are logs, and care pathways are the complex events. We are
not interested in the stream dimension of these approaches, but their formalisms to represent
complex events may be adapted in the context of static logs.

Temporal databases (Snodgrass, 1992) extend the notion of database to timestamped
data. Databases issued data representation problems but also speciﬁc querying language prob-
lems. We gather in this family the temporal extension of relational databases (e.g. TSQL)
but also web semantic approaches which combine query languages (e.g. SPARQL) and ex-
pressive description languages. Care trajectories are facts in the temporal database and the
querying of care pathways becomes a problem of specifying care pathways in the query lan-
guage. Rivault et al. (2019) shown that semantic web is an interesting approach for our
problem, but does not explicitly address the problem of timed queries.

Finally, Knowledge Representation and Reasoning (KR) (Levesque, 1986) is “the study
of how what we know can at the same time be represented as comprehensibly as possible and
reasoned with as effectively as possibly". In this research domain, temporal KR is focused
on representing and reasoning about time. It gives rise to several logics (Long, 1989), for
instance: Allen’s logic, McDermott’s logic, Event Calculus or Halpern & Shoham’s logic.

5Sequences taht register the set of atomic propositions that are valid along the execution, cf. part 3.2.2 in

(Baier & Katoen, 2008)

Temporal models of care sequences

KR is a general framework to study how to represent care trajectories and how to model
reasoning-based queries on care pathways. Approaches from the other families may be
represented with appropriate logics. Studying KR formalisms seems of paramount impor-
tance as it provides common foundations to compare various approaches. Description Logic
(DL) (Baader et al., 2003) is a KR formalism allowing ontology-mediated query answering
(OMQA) (Bienvenu, 2016). Artale et al. (Artale et al., 2017) present a temporal extension
of DL that may be suitable for our problem. For instance, (O’Connor et al., 2009) developed
a tool based on OWL for research data management with a temporal reasoning in a clinical
trial system.

4 Comparison of approach on a use case

4.1 Rational

This section introduces a real use case. In this example, pharmacoepidemiologists want to
select patients with Venous Thromboembolism (VTE) from the data contained in the SNDS.
Venous thromboembolism, i.e. deep vein thrombosis (DVT) or pulmonary embolism (PE),
is a frequent and potentially fatal disease (Oger & EPI-GETBO, 2000; Delluc et al., 2018).
This requires to survey how many people are concerned, if the number of patients increased
and if a speciﬁc drug has an impact. The difﬁculty for epidemiologists lies in the description
of the care pathways that will accurately identify VTE from the SNDS data. The description
below describes two care pathways that physicians proposed to identify VTE (referring to
Figure 3, this description is between the red and blue levels).

In clinical practice facing a clinical suspicion of VTE, physicians ﬁrst prescribe
anticoagulant and then conﬁrm or not the diagnosis through speciﬁc medical
acts: for instance Doppler ultrasonography or CT scan. Patients with suspected
PE are often hospitalized whereas patients with suspected DVT are managed
on a ambulatory basis. If the suspicion is conﬁrmed, anticoagulant deliveries
continues for 3 to 12 months or sometimes longer duration. Hence, diagnosis
(through medical act) is preceded or followed by anticoagulant initiation within
a time window of at most 0 to 2 days, keeping in mind that PE suspicion leads to
hospitalisation during which medical act to conﬁrm the diagnosis are performed
and then anticoagulant is observed only after the patient comes back home.

Through these observations, pharmacoepidemiologists identiﬁed the following two care path-
ways to detect patients with VTE form SNDS data (referring to Figure 3 this description is in
the blue level):

1. A diagnosis (DVT or PE) or a medical act (Doppler or CT scan) during or prior to
anticoagulant(AC) deliveries for 1 to 2 days and delivery lasts a minimum of 3 months
and a maximum of 12 months (sometimes longer). Each delivery is separated by 0 to 2
months.

2. A diagnosis PE during an hospitalisation followed by AC delivery.

These care pathways contain sequential order but also time constraints between events (for
instance number of days) or duration of events (time window). Searching for such patterns
requires high expressiveness that make databases query languages (SQL, TSQL) practically
difﬁcult to use. Next section illustrates alternative solutions to represent the green level (see
Figure 3).

This use case illustrated the problem of formalizing care pathways of patients suffering
from VTE. But, for sake of generality, our formalism has to specify the care pathway patterns
of as many case studies as possible.

IA & Santé 2019

4.2 Comparison of different models

This section aims at illustrating the comparison of four formalisms, Description Logic (DL),
Chronicles, LTL and MTL to discuss about their power of expressivity in our case of study.

DL supplies ontologies query answering technologies for Ontology-Based Data Access
(OBDA) and is well known to represent medical data. Indeed, Description Logic is used to
describe and reason about concepts on data. Reasoning with Description Logic is performed
in three steps. The ﬁrst one consists in deﬁning the data and the data form (called ABox)
which contains knowledge at the instance level: a set of assertion deﬁning concepts, roles
and a countably inﬁnite set of individuals names. Concepts with individuals names and roles
with individuals names are forming atoms.

The second step consists in deﬁne a base of knowledge (TBox) which is a set of concepts
inclusions. Concept inclusions represent a hierarchy of concepts. For instance, the concept
B01AF 01 representing anticoagulant drugs is the leaf concept in the hierarchy of concept
modeling the ATC classiﬁcation:

• B: Blood and blood forming organs
• B01: Antithrombotic agents

• B01AF: Direct Xa inhibitor
• B01AF01: Rivaroxaban

And considering the CCAM (medical acts) code for the Doppler: EDQM001 (iliac and
lower limb arteries) we could construct the following ABox, where Pierre and Paul are pa-
tients and ni are dates of medical events:

B01(Patient1, t1) B01(Patient1, t2) P E(Patient1, t3)
B01AF 01(Patient2, t1) B01AF 01(Patient2, t3) EDQM 001(Patient2, t4)
t1 < t2 < t3 < t4
And TBox issued from the previous ATC classiﬁcation:

B01AF 01 (cid:118) B01AF B01AF (cid:118) B01 B01 (cid:118) B

B01AF 01 is the subclass of B01AF which is the subclass of B01 which is the subclass
of B. Operators linking concepts are deﬁned depending on the class of DL chosen. For
example, the ALC family offers the concept constructors: negation, conjunction, disjunction,
existential restriction ∃ and universal restriction ∀.

The third step is to deﬁne a query to extract information from knowledge contained in
ABox and TBox. Usually, queries are expressed with a ﬁrst order logic. Artale et al. (2017)
designed a temporal DL: TQL that extends the standard ontology language: OWL 2QL. It
offers the capability of having time as individuals names and to compare whether an atom
occurs before another. In our case study, we propose a query to ﬁnd patients designed by the
use case deﬁned in Section 4.1.

∃patientID, t1(tref < t1) ∧ EDQM 001(patientID, tref ) ∧ B01(patientID, t1)

∧t2(t2 < t1) ∧ B01(patientID, t2)
∧t3(t3 < t1) ∧ B01(patientID, t3)
We ﬁnd patients having three deliveries of B01 (and subclasses of B01) in a row and the ﬁrst
one is delivered after an Doppler. The temporal information that can be represented here is
limited to the order of the events. Delay or duration can not be speciﬁed.

To express queries with temporal delays, the formalism of chronicle represents a care path-
way as a temporal constraint graph. Chronicles allow the expression of sequential order of
events with temporal constraints such as interval of time. Furthermore, negative time in the

Temporal models of care sequences

[0,60]

[0,60]

[-92,1]

B01

B01

B01

EDQM 001

Figure 4: Chronicles

interval expresses that an event may occur before or after another one. Figure 4 speciﬁes pa-
tients having at least three anticoagulant deliveries separated by 0 to 60 days, and a diagnosis
DVT before, after or during deliveries. DVT occurs 92 days earlier or one day after the third
delivery.

However, we can not explicitly restrict the number of deliveries to 12 months as deﬁned
in the use case. We also cannot use the notion of no event (event does not occur). Model
checking offer the possibility to express no event and can be used as queries. Such as an
example we propose the following LTL formula as an example applied to our case of study:
(♦DB01 ∧ (cid:13)(♦DB01) ∧ (cid:13)(♦DB01) ∧ (♦(DV T ∨ P E))

The LTL formula represents a care pathway with at least three deliveries and a diagnosis DVT
or PE. We literally read it: in the future (♦), there is the delivery of B01 and (∧) it is followed
((cid:13)), in the future, by the delivery of B01 and it is followed, in the future, by a delivery of B01
and, in the future, there are the diagnosis DVT or (∨) PE). LTL only contains order between
events and doesn’t contains time constraints. It is quite limited for our problem, so we refer
to its temporal extension MTL. The MTL formula adds the capability to express quantitative
temporal constraints. We propose the following MTL formula as an example applied to our
case of study:
♦(DV T ∨ P E) ⇒ ((♦[0 2]DBO1) ∧ (♦[0 60]DBO1) ∧ (♦[0 60]DBO1) ∧ (♦≥365 ((cid:3)(¬DBO1)))

It represents a care pathway with a DVT or PE followed between 0 to 2 days after by three
AC deliveries separated between 0 to 60 days, and no deliveries occur after 365 days. MTL
can explicitly restrict the number of deliveries and temporal constraints but the notion of
sequences is manually found by the multiple use of ♦. For deep understanding of notations,
we refer the reader to Bouyer et al. (2005).

From computational point of view, Chronicles may be very space/time-efﬁciently to be
recognizes in care trajectories. Simple LTL formula would also be space/time-efﬁcient to
check but it is expressively poor.
It is a
theoretical limitation but, not necessary a practical constraint Ouaknine & Worrell (2005).

In contrast, MTL is known to be undecidable.

5 Conclusion

In this article, we introduced the context of pharmaco-epidemiological studies with medico-
administrative databases and the challenge to query such databases with medical questions.
It consists in ﬁnding patients satisfying a medical pattern that we want to be expressive.

To express medical patterns, we use the formalism of Description Logic to describe data
and include medical knowledge issued from the available classiﬁcation (e.g. ATC, CCAM).
To query these data, we compared solutions issued from ﬁrst order logic, Chronicles and
MTL. It shows that none of them is enough expressive to correctly translate all the desirable
constraints of the care pathway. The future work consists of extending these formalisms and
to study efﬁciency issues by testing them through many cases of study on the SNDS.

References

ANICIC D., FODOR P., RUDOLPH S., STÜHMER R., STOJANOVIC N. & STUDER R. (2011).
In Proceedings of the Conference on Rea-

ETALIS: Rule-based reasoning in event processing.
soning in event-based distributed systems, p. 99–124.

IA & Santé 2019

ARTALE A., KONTCHAKOV R., KOVTUNOVA A., RYZHIKOV V., WOLTER F. & ZAKHARYASCHEV
M. (2017). Ontology-mediated query answering over temporal data: A survey. In Proceedings of
the International Symposium on Temporal Representation and Reasoning (TIME), p. 1–37.

BAADER F., CALVANESE D., MCGUINNESS D., PATEL-SCHNEIDER P. & NARDI D. (2003). The
description logic handbook: Theory, implementation and applications. Cambridge university press.

BAIER C. & KATOEN J.-P. (2008). Principles of model checking. MIT press.
BIENVENU M. (2016). Ontology-mediated query answering: harnessing knowledge to get more from
In Proceedings of the International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI), p.

data.
4058–4061.

BOTTRIGHI A., GIORDANO L., MOLINO G., MONTANI S., TERENZIANI P. & TORCHIO M. (2010).
Adopting model checking techniques for clinical guidelines veriﬁcation. Artiﬁcial intelligence in
medicine, 48(1), 1–19.

BOUYER P., CHEVALIER F. & MARKEY N. (2005). On the expressiveness of tptl and mtl. In Inter-
national Conference on Foundations of Software Technology and Theoretical Computer Science, p.
432–443: Springer.

CABALAR P., OTERO R. P. & POSE S. G. (2000). Temporal constraint networks in action.

In

Proceedings of the European Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (ECAI), p. 543–547.

CLARKE JR E. M., GRUMBERG O., KROENING D., PELED D. & VEITH H. (2018). Model checking.

COMBI C., KERAVNOU-PAPAILIOU E. & SHAHAR Y. (2010). Temporal information systems in

Springer.

medicine. Springer.

DELLUC A., IANOTTO J.-C., TROMEUR C., DE MOREUIL C., COUTURAUD F., LACUT K.,
LE MOIGNE E., LOUIS P., THEREAUX J., METGES J.-P. et al. (2018). Real-world incidence
of cancer following a ﬁrst unprovoked venous thrombosis: Results from the EPIGETBO study.
Thrombosis research, 164, 79–84.

DOUSSON C. & LE MAIGAT P. (2007). Chronicle recognition improvement using temporal focusing
and hierarchization. In Proceedings of the International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence
(IJCAI), p. 324–329.

GIATRAKOS N., ARTIKIS A., DELIGIANNAKIS A. & GAROFALAKIS M. (2017). Complex event
recognition in the big data era. Proceedings of Conference on Very Large Data Base Endowment
(VLDB Endow.), 10(12), 1996–1999.

LEVESQUE H. J. (1986). Knowledge representation and reasoning. Annual review of computer sci-

ence, 1(1), 255–287.

LONG D. (1989). A review of temporal logics. The Knowledge Engineering Review, 4(2), 141–162.
OGER E. & EPI-GETBO (2000). Incidence of venous thromboembolism: a community-based study

in western france. Thrombosis and haemostasis, 83(05), 657–660.

OUAKNINE J. & WORRELL J. (2005). On the decidability of metric temporal logic. In 20th Annual

IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Science (LICS’05), p. 188–197.

O’CONNOR M. J., SHANKAR R. D., PARRISH D. B. & DAS A. K. (2009). Knowledge-data integra-
tion for temporal reasoning in a clinical trial system. International journal of medical informatics,
78, 77–85.

RIVAULT Y., DAMERON O. & LE MEUR N. (2019). queryMed: Semantic web functions for linking

pharmacological and medical knowledge to data. Bioinformatics, p. to appear.

SNODGRASS R. T. (1992). Temporal databases. In Theories and methods of spatio-temporal reason-

ing in geographic space, p. 22–64. Springer.

TUPPIN P., RUDANT J., CONSTANTINOU P., GASTALDI-MÉNAGER C., RACHAS A., DE ROQUE-
FEUIL L., MAURA G., CAILLOL H., TAJAHMADY A., COSTE J. et al. (2017). Value of a national
administrative database to guide public decisions: From the système national d’information inter-
régimes de l’assurance maladie (sniiram) to the système national des données de santé (snds) in
france. Revue d’epidemiologie et de sante publique, 65, S149–S167.

WEILL A., PAÏTA M., TUPPIN P., FAGOT J.-P., NEUMANN A., SIMON D., RICORDEAU P., MON-
TASTRUC J.-L. & ALLEMAND H. (2010). Benﬂuorex and valvular heart disease: a cohort study
of a million people with diabetes mellitus. Pharmacoepidemiology and drug safety, 19(12), 1256–
1262.

