Provenance for the Description Logic ELHr (Extended
Abstract)
Camille Bourgaux, Ana Ozaki, Rafael Peñaloza, Livia Predoiu

To cite this version:

Camille Bourgaux, Ana Ozaki, Rafael Peñaloza, Livia Predoiu. Provenance for the Description Logic
ELHr (Extended Abstract). DL 2020 - 33rd International Workshop on Description Logics, Sep 2020,
Rhodes / Virtual, Greece. ￿hal-02947265￿

HAL Id: hal-02947265

https://inria.hal.science/hal-02947265

Submitted on 23 Sep 2020

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

Provenance for the Description Logic ELHr
(Extended Abstract)

Camille Bourgaux1, Ana Ozaki2,4, Rafael Pe˜naloza3, and Livia Predoiu4

1DI ENS, ENS, CNRS, PSL University & Inria, Paris, France
2University of Bergen, Norway
3University of Milano-Bicocca, Italy
4Free University of Bozen-Bolzano, Italy

Abstract. This extended abstract presents our work on provenance for
the description logic ELHr published at IJCAI 2020 [2].

Important reasoning tasks performed over description logics (DL) ontologies
are axiom entailment, i.e. deciding whether a given DL axiom follows from the
ontology; and query answering. In many settings it is crucial to know how a
consequence—e.g. an axiom or a query—has been derived from the ontology. In
the database community, provenance has been studied for nearly 30 years [5,
3] and gained traction when the connection to semirings, so called provenance
semirings [6, 7] was discovered. Provenance semirings serve as an abstract alge-
braic tool to record and track provenance information; that is, to keep track of
the speciﬁc database tuples used for deriving the query, and of the way they have
been processed in the derivation. Besides explaining a query answer, provenance
has many applications like: computing the probability or the degree of conﬁdence
of an answer, counting the diﬀerent ways of producing an answer, handling au-
thorship, data clearance, or user preferences. Semiring provenance has drawn
interest beyond relational databases, and in particular, it has recently been con-
sidered for ontology-mediated query answering [1] and for ontology-based data
access [4], a setting where a database is enriched with an ontology and mappings
between them. In the latter, the ontology axioms are annotated with provenance
variables. Queries are then annotated with provenance polynomials that express
their provenance information.

Example 1. Consider the facts mayor(Venice, Brugnaro) and mayor(Venice, Orsoni),
stating that Venice has mayors Brugnaro and Orsoni, annotated respectively
with provenance information v1 and v2, and the DL axiom ran(mayor) (cid:118) Mayor,
expressing that the range of the role mayor is the concept Mayor, annotated with
v3. The query ∃x.Mayor(x) asks if there is someone who is a mayor. The an-
swer is yes and it can be derived using ran(mayor) (cid:118) Mayor together with any
of the two facts, interpreting x by Brugnaro or Orsoni. This is expressed by the
provenance polynomial v1 × v3 + v2 × v3. Intuitively, × expresses the joint use
of axioms in a derivation path of the query, and + the alternative derivations.

Copyright c(cid:13) 2020 for this paper by its authors. Use permitted under Creative Com-
mons License Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY 4.0).

An important contribution of [4] was a semantic deﬁnition of provenance for
annotated DL-LiteR ontologies—which contains axioms of the form (α, v) where
α is a DL axiom and v a provenance variable—based on annotated models.
An annotated interpretation I interprets concepts (resp. roles) by sets of pairs
of a domain element and a provenance monomial (resp. triples of two domain
elements and a provenance monomial). It satisﬁes e.g. an annotated concept
assertion (A(a), v) if (aI, vI) ∈ AI, and an annotated general concept inclusion
(GCI) (C (cid:118) D, v) if (d, mI) ∈ C I implies that (d, (v × m)I) ∈ DI. Annotated
models and entailment of DL axioms annotated with provenance monomials are
then deﬁned as expected. Finally, entailment of conjunctive queries annotated
with sums of monomials is deﬁned by considering the matches of the query
(extended with binary and ternary predicates to handle provenance information)
in the annotated models of the ontology. However, [4] only considered DL-LiteR,
which has the particularity of not allowing for conjunctions or qualiﬁed role
restrictions in the TBox axioms. Our ﬁrst contribution is to adapt the provenance
semantics of [4] for the ELHr variant of the lightweight DL EL, extending the
semantics to those ELHr axioms that do not occur in DL-LiteR. It turns out that
handling the conjunction allowed in ELHr axioms is not trivial. To obtain models
from which we can derive meaningful provenance-annotated consequences, we
adopt ×-idempotent semirings and a syntactic restriction on ELHr that forbids
conjunctions and qualiﬁed restriction of a role to appear in the right-hand side
of GCIs (preserving the expressivity of full ELHr when annotations are not
considered). We then devise methods to handle annotated ontologies in this
context.

1. We present a completion algorithm for annotated ELHr ontologies that com-
putes all axioms annotated with provenance monomials that follow from the
ontology in exponential time. We show that it allows us to solve annotated
axiom entailment and instance queries in ELHr in polynomial time in the
size of the ontology and polynomial space in the size of the provenance poly-
nomial.

2. We also consider the problem of computing the set of relevant provenance
variables for the entailment of an axiom (or instance query) α from an an-
notated ontology O, i.e., the set of variables v such that O |= (α, v × m) for
some monomial m. We show that this can be done in polynomial time, using
an adaptation of the completion algorithm.

3. Finally, we investigate conjunctive query answering. The query answering
methods developed in [4] cannot be extended to ELHr since they rely on
the FO-rewritability of conjunctive queries in DL-LiteR, a property that
does not hold for ELHr. Therefore, we adapt the combined approach for
query answering in EL [8] to provenance-annotated ELHr ontologies. We
deﬁne a ﬁnite canonical model and a rewriting of the query such that the
ontology entails the original annotated query if and only if the canonical
model satisﬁes the rewritten query.

References

1. Camille Bourgaux and Ana Ozaki. Querying attributed DL-Lite ontologies using

provenance semirings. In AAAI, 2019.

2. Camille Bourgaux, Ana Ozaki, Rafael Pe˜naloza, and Livia Predoiu. Provenance for

the description logic ELHr. In IJCAI, 2020.

3. Peter Buneman. The providence of provenance. In BNCOD, 2013.
4. Diego Calvanese, Davide Lanti, Ana Ozaki, Rafael Pe˜naloza, and Guohui Xiao.

Enriching ontology-based data access with provenance. In IJCAI, 2019.

5. James Cheney, Laura Chiticariu, and Wang Chiew Tan. Provenance in databases:

Why, how, and where. Foundations and Trends in Databases, 1(4), 2009.

6. Todd J. Green, Gregory Karvounarakis, and Val Tannen. Provenance semirings. In

PODS, 2007.

7. Todd J. Green and Val Tannen. The semiring framework for database provenance.

In PODS, 2017.

8. Carsten Lutz, David Toman, and Frank Wolter. Conjunctive query answering in

the description logic EL using a relational database system. In IJCAI, 2009.

