Web Futures: Inclusive, Intelligent, Sustainable The
2020 Manifesto for Web Science
Bettina Berendt, Fabien Gandon, Susan Halford, Wendy Hall, Jim Hendler,

Katharina E Kinder-Kurlanda, Eirini Ntoutsi, Steffen Staab

To cite this version:

Bettina Berendt, Fabien Gandon, Susan Halford, Wendy Hall, Jim Hendler, et al.. Web Futures:
Inclusive, Intelligent, Sustainable The 2020 Manifesto for Web Science. Dagstuhl Manifestos, 2021,
￿10.4230/DagMan.9.1.1￿. ￿hal-03189474￿

HAL Id: hal-03189474

https://inria.hal.science/hal-03189474

Submitted on 3 Apr 2021

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

Manifesto from Dagstuhl Perspectives Workshop 18262
Web Futures: Inclusive, Intelligent, Sustainable
The 2020 Manifesto for Web Science

Bettina Berendt1, Fabien Gandon2, Susan Halford∗3, Wendy Hall4,
Jim Hendler∗5, Katharina E. Kinder-Kurlanda6, Eirini Ntoutsi∗7,
and Steffen Staab∗8

1

2
3
4
5
6
7
8

TU Berlin and Weizenbaum Institute for the Networked Society, Germany;

KU Leuven, Belgium. berendt@tu-berlin.be

Inria, Université Côte d’Azur, CNRS, I3S, France. fabien.gandon@inria.fr
University of Bristol, UK. susan.halford@bristol.ac.uk
University of Southampton, UK. wh@ecs.soton.ac.uk
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, USA. hendler@cs.rpi.edu
University of Klagenfurt, Austria. katharina.kinder-kurlanda@aau.at
Freie Universität Berlin, Germany. eirini.ntoutsi@fu-berlin.de
Universität Stuttgart, Germany, and University of Southampton, UK.

s.r.staab@soton.ac.uk

Abstract

This Manifesto was produced from the Perspectives Workshop 18262 entitled “10 Years of Web
Science” that took place at Schloss Dagstuhl from June 24 – 29, 2018. At the Workshop, we
revisited the origins of Web Science, explored the challenges and opportunities of the Web, and
looked ahead to potential futures for both the Web and Web Science.

We explain issues that society faces in the Web by the ambivalences that are inherent in
the Web. All the enormous benefits that the Web offers – for information sharing, collective
organization and distributed activity, social inclusion and economic growth – will always carry
along negative consequences, too, and 30 years after its creation negative consequences of the
Web are only too apparent.

The Web continues to evolve and its next major step will involve Artificial Intelligence (AI)
at large. AI has the potential to amplify positive and negative outcomes, and we explore these
possibilities, situating them within the wider debate about the future of regulation and governance
for the Web. Finally, we outline the need to extend Web Science as the science that is devoted
to the analysis and engineering of the Web, to strengthen our role in shaping the future of the
Web and present five key directions for capacity building that are necessary to achieve this:
(i), supporting interdisciplinarity, (ii), supporting collaboration, (iii), supporting the sustainable
Web, (iv), supporting the Intelligent Web, and (v), supporting the Inclusive Web.

Our writing reflects our background in several disciplines of the social and technical sciences
and that these disciplines emphasize topics to various extents. We are acutely aware that our
observations occupy a particular point in time and are skewed towards our experience as Western
scholars – a limitation that Web Science will need to overcome.

Perspectives Workshop June 24–29, 2018 – www.dagstuhl.de/18262
2012 ACM Subject Classification Information systems → World Wide Web; Human-centered
computing → Collaborative and social computing theory, concepts and paradigms; Computing
methodologies → Philosophical/theoretical foundations of artificial intelligence; Social and
professional topics → History of computing; Social and professional topics → Censorship;
Social and professional topics → Surveillance; Social and professional topics → Network access
control

Keywords and phrases Web Science, Artificial Intelligence, Web Governance, Capacity Building
Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/DagMan.9.1.1

∗ Editor / Organizer

Except where otherwise noted, content of this manifesto is licensed
under a Creative Commons BY 4.0 International license

Web Futures: Inclusive, Intelligent, Sustainable, Dagstuhl Manifestos, Vol. 9, Issue 1, pp. 1–42
Editors: Bettina Berendt, Fabien Gandon, Susan Halford, Wendy Hall, Jim Hendler, Katharina E.
Kinder-Kurlanda, Eirini Ntoutsi, and Steffen Staab

Dagstuhl Manifestos
Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany

2

Web Science

Funding Steffen Staab: The work performed by Steffen Staab has been partially supported by
EU-Project Co-Inform which has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020
research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 770302.

Acknowledgements The authors of this Manifesto are greatly indebted to the co-participants
of the Dagstuhl Perspectives Workshop. We also appreciate the support and patience that
Dr. Kunz and the team at Dagstuhl had with us when we took much longer than planned in
putting together this Manifesto.

Executive Summary

The Web has changed the world, and the world has changed the Web. From relatively humble
origins at CERN in 1989, the Web has become the central nervous system of our planet, used
by over 4 billion people across all spheres of life and reaching into the lives of those who do
not even know it exists, shaping global markets, climate science, political conflict and war.

The possible futures of the Web concern us all.

In this Manifesto, we address potential futures arising from key ambivalences that lie
at the heart of the Web. For all the enormous benefits on offer – for information sharing,
collective organization and distributed activity, social inclusion and economic growth – the
negative consequences are only too apparent. Examples include surveillance and privacy
concerns, fake news and election interference, and the massive centralisation of data and
infrastructure in the hands of a few near-monopolistic private companies.

Artificial Intelligence (AI) has the potential to amplify these outcomes – for better
and for worse. AI might radically extend capabilities for propagation of misinformation,
biased decision making, social polarization and new forms of exploitation. AI also offers
opportunities to mobilise against these practices and trajectories, to support a web that is
more inclusive and collaborative than ever before. We explore these possibilities, situating
them within the wider debate about the future of regulation and governance for the Web,
the future of Web Science and how this can be supported to shape a Web and a world that
we would prefer to see.

In Section 2, we outline the ambivalences that sit at the heart of the Web, and its future:
Information freedom vs. information quality
Personalisation vs. privacy
Mass participation vs. manipulation of the masses
Inclusiveness and fairness vs. exploitation
Sustainability vs. Growth

These tensions will never be fixed once and for all. Our question is: what can be done to
meet the challenges that they pose and drive the Web towards the most positive outcomes
possible?

Section 3 explores this question at the cutting edge of today’s Web, outlining how AI
extends and deepens the tensions described above, as the Web becomes an ever more complex
network of human and technical agents. We develop an agenda for harnessing AI towards
progressive ends, for example, to mitigate the activities of regressive and malign actors and
towards a benevolent, inclusive, empowering and sustainable Web for the future.

In Section 4, we consider the wider landscape of governance and regulation that will be
required in order to support the future Web. This requires interdisciplinary analysis, technical
innovation and regulatory systems to govern humans, AIs and their interactions online. We

B. Berendt et al.

3

propose that the concept of “internet governance” conceived to manage IP addresses and
Domain Name Servers should be expanded to “Web governance” as a the field of practice
through which we can shape the future of the Web. Beyond the value of governance-as-usual,
for example on hate-speech or fraud, Web-specific forms of governance are required to tackle
new problems and interdependencies online, including the governance of artificial agents.
This will only be effective if developed through global collaboration and enforcement.

The interdisciplinary capacity of Web Science is critical to all the endeavours described in
Sections 1–4. Without well-developed interdisciplinary collaboration that draws together all
the necessary forms of expertise, we cannot expect this to succeed. We have learnt a great deal
over the past decade about how difficult this is to do and what it takes to do this effectively.
In Sections 5 and 6 we explore how to build on what has been learnt, to support research
practices that integrate expertise across the disciplines to deliver the next decade of Web
Science. Section 5 explores how to support and develop Web Science as a field of research and
collaborative practice, through joint research and shared infrastructures, shared methods to
grow interdisciplinary communication and create combined expertise, harnessing AI for Web
Science research and through the use of participatory methods for widespread engagement.
In Section 6, we turn attention to how this capacity can be developed through policy in
academic institutions, with funding authorities, educators, governments and external partners
in industry, business and the not-for-profit sector. We postulate that all these stakeholders
must individually and jointly support (i), interdisciplinarity, (ii), collaboration, (iii), the
Sustainable Web, (iv), the Intelligent Web, and (v), the Inclusive Web.

Our views were informed by the Perspectives Workshop 18262 on “10 Years of Web
Science” that took place at Schloss Dagstuhl from June 24 – 29, 2018. Web Science was
established in 2008 to develop new knowledge and understanding of the past, present and
future of the Web. This demanded collaboration across computational and social sciences,
the humanities and beyond. The Web cannot be understood only as a technical system
or only as a social system. It is both at once. This manifesto combines the expertise of
workshop participants and includes a range of writing conventions, crafted as a shared path,
with generous compromises in all disciplinary directions. At the workshop, we reviewed what
we have learnt from the past decade of Web Science and looked ahead to potential futures
for Web Science, and for the Web.

Participants in the workshop included sociologists and computer scientists, philosophers,
political scientists, anthropologists, media scholars and industry partners. In spite of such
breadth, we are acutely aware that our observations occupy a particular point in time and
are skewed towards our experience as Western scholars. The key challenge for Web Science
is to broaden this base as we move forwards towards a promising future of Web Science and
a beneficial future Web.

1 8 2 6 2

4

Web Science

Table of Contents

Executive Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Ambivalences of The Web . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Information Freedom vs. Information Quality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Personalization vs. Privacy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Influence by the Masses vs. Manipulation of the Masses

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2

6

8

8

8

9

Inclusiveness and Fairness vs. Exploitation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10

Sustainability vs. Growth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

11

Ambivalences without an End . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12

The Web linking all Forms of Intelligence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12

A Historical Trend toward a Web of Everything on Everything . . . . . . . . . . . 13

Challenges at the Individual Level: A Variety of Intelligences on the Web . . . . .

14

Challenges at Group Level: Collaborations of Different Intelligences on the Web . 16

Governance and Regulation of People and AIs in the Web . . . . . . . . . . . 18

The Scope of Web Governance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18

Balancing Ambivalences through Legal Web Governance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19

Governance of Artificial Agents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22

Beyond Laws . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22

Global Web Governance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

24

Extending Web Science to Address Ambivalences of the Web . . . . . . . . .

24

Collaborative Research and Shared Infrastructures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25

Boundary Objects for Interdisciplinarity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25

Engaging with AI for Web Science Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26

Participatory Methods: a Web “For Everyone” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28

The Role of Web Science in Governing the Web . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29

Futures of Web Science

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30

Capacity Building . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30

Actions to be Taken by Researchers

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

31

Actions to be Taken by Academic Institutions and Funding Agencies . . . . . . . . 32

Actions to be Taken by Educators

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33

Actions to be Taken by Enterprises . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

34

Actions to be Taken by Policy Makers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35

B. Berendt et al.

5

Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

37

Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38

References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38

1 8 2 6 2

6

Web Science

1

Introduction

Thirty years have passed since Tim Berners-Lee proposed a new architecture for information
sharing for Physicists working with the high energy Physics laboratories at CERN. Shortly
afterwards, this came to be known as the World Wide Web. And the rest is history. The
Web has evolved from a draft proposal to a global infrastructure with over 4 billion regular
users, and it shapes the lives of those who do not even know of its existence.1

The Web has become the nervous system for our planet.

This has been an unexpected journey. What was originally imagined as a technical system

is now deeply embedded in and shaped by the social world.

Web architecture and infrastructure are technical, but the Web cannot be understood
as only technical. The Web is shaped by social activity – by individuals, communities,
governments and businesses – but it cannot be understood as only social.

In 2006, Berners-Lee et al. [8] proposed a new interdisciplinary field of study “Web
Science”, to research how the Web was evolving and what might be done to shape its future.
Even then, it was clear that the Web was already implicated in some fundamental social
and economic transformations – and that it posed some unexpected challenges, for example
cybercrime, hate-speech and the increasing centralisation of content and infrastructure.

Over the past decade, Web Science has grown and spread across the world2, integrating
expertise from across the engineering sciences, social sciences, humanities and beyond (for
definitions and state-of-the-art surveys, see [44, 72]). Web Scientists have generated new
knowledge and understanding of how the Web has changed the world, and how the world
has changed the Web.

The World ⇀↽ The Web

Web Scientists have traced how the Web generates new business models [38], enabled
the effective use of big data and Web infrastructures for peace-building in fragile states [81]
and built tools to analyse Web data at scale and speed for a wide variety of purposes [76].
On the dark side of the Web, Web Scientists have documented atrocities in information
warfare [66, 67], identified how fake news is influencing our political landscapes [57, 59] and
developed methods to identify individual cybercriminals on the Dark Web [79].

And still the Web evolves. In the years since Web Science was founded, we have seen the
emergence of social media, a fully fledged data economy and revelations of mass surveillance
and interference in democratic elections. And now, a new wave of Artificial Intelligence,
spurred on by the phenomenal data resources created (in large part) by the Web, has begun
a new round of transformations that mark a step-change in the Web of the future.

The Web ⇀↽ Artificial Intelligence

The Web has both facilitated the current and rapid growth of Artificial Intelligence as
a field and – in turn – will be increasingly shaped by a variety of artificial intelligences,
developed by researchers in academia, in business and elsewhere. Looking towards the
future, the Web will be comprised of a broader range of actors than ever before, as humans,
artificial agents and other technologies interact shaping each-other and shaping outcomes
across the globe.

1 For example, influencing commodity prices, global politics and climate change research.
2 http://wstnet.webscience.org

B. Berendt et al.

7

Exactly how this will happen is, as yet, undetermined. On the one hand, there are very
real concerns. For example, AI is radically extending the capabilities for propagation of
misinformation, of biases in information distribution and decision making, and it further
extends social polarization, harassment and hate speech. On the other hand, there are also
opportunities for AI to mobilise against these activities and support a Web that is more
inclusive and collaborative than ever before.

The future of the Web is a deeply sociotechnical question [72]. Web Science is essential if

we are to address these concerns and harness the opportunities for an AI-enabled Web.

Web Science ⇀↽ The Web of Humans and Artificial Intelligences

This Manifesto for Web Science addresses the future of the Web, and arises from our
Dagstuhl Workshop in June 2018. Participants in this workshop included sociologists and
computer scientists, philosophers, political scientists, anthropologists and media scholars.
Staying true to the interdisciplinary commitments of Web Science and the diverse disciplinary
expertise of its authors, this report is following a range of writing conventions. It has been
crafted as a shared path, with generous compromises in all disciplinary directions.

We opened our manifesto with the observation that the Web is now the nervous system
for our planet. All our futures are entangled with the future of the Web. So “Web Science”
is not just for researchers. It is for everyone. It is for entrepreneurs with an eye for a
new business proposition, corporations seeking to innovate. It is for governments wanting
to make the most of the Web for services and engagement, whilst assuring their citizens
that they have robust regulation and governance in place to manage the Web. And Web
Science is for individuals and communities, whose everyday activities make up so much of the
content online, whose data are driving the data economy, and whose lives are increasingly
unimaginable without the Web. Web Science seeks to engage all the interests above, to create
new dialogues and ensure that we build a comprehensive and actionable understanding of
the Web as we seek to shape its future.

In Section 2 below, we outline the current challenges facing the Web, in general and
with particular reference to Artificial Intelligence. In Section 3, we outline how Web Science
can address these challenges, by shaping the development of AIs for the Web in a socially
responsible way. In Section 4, we broaden the view to consider the wider landscape of
governance and regulation that will be required in order to support a fair and inclusive
Web. The interdisciplinary capacity of Web Science is critical to these endeavours. Without
well-developed collaboration that draws together all the necessary forms of expertise, we
cannot expect this to succeed. We have learnt a great deal over the past decade about how
difficult this is to do and what it takes to do this effectively. In Section 5 we explore how we
can build on what has been learnt, to support research practices that integrate expertise
across the disciplines to deliver the next decade of Web Science. A key challenge for Web
Science is to broaden our base as we move forwards in time. In Section 6, we turn attention
to how this capacity can be developed by academia, enterprises, funding authorities and
governments. In doing so, we are acutely aware that our observations occupy a particular
point in time and are skewed towards our experience as Western scholars. Addressing this
will also be critical for the future of Web Science and the future of the Web.

1 8 2 6 2

8

Web Science

2

Ambivalences of The Web

Whilst the Web is a mighty instrument for individuals, institutions and society, as an
instrument it can be put both to beneficial or to detrimental use. For all the enormous
benefits that the Web offers for information sharing, collective organization and distributed
activity, social inclusion and economic growth, the negative consequences are only too
It is a core task for Web Science to analyse, understand and navigate these
apparent.
ambivalences of the Web, ideally amplifying the good and countering the bad.

2.1

Information Freedom vs. Information Quality

There is a very long history behind the idea that the sharing of ideas and of evidence-based
information is positive for social inclusion, productivity and well-being in society.3 The
printing press greatly reduced the costs of information dissemination and allowed the sharing
of ideas and evidence that supported the development of modern science. The invention of
the Web further reduced these costs by many orders of magnitudes democratizing access to
formal knowledge (open science, free textbooks, historical sources) and informal knowledge
(recipes, reviews, etc.). Both the production and consumption of information such as political
news and scientific results has been greatly widened, accelerated, which is prima facie a
positive outcome.

In the pre-Web era, publishers were gatekeepers. Their role could be ambivalent, too,
as they could exert quality control or censorship on content. In the era of the Web, it is
inexpensive to become a publisher. While it is easy to publish facts and judgments, it is equally
possible to widely disseminate mis- and disinformation, unfounded beliefs and prejudices.

Mis- and disinformation existed before the Web, but the Web has facilitated its distribution,
at scale and speed. Artificial Intelligence further amplifies the problem. It has been a core
principle of modernity to question printed information, but to believe in original sources,
such as photography, audio or video. Artificial Intelligence allows for the creation of deep
fakes, e. g., video or audio faking the voice and the appearance of anybody while being
indistinguishable from true video and audio.

2.2 Personalization vs. Privacy

Core to the success of the Web is the convenience that it offers. Using our personal devices,
information consumption and production has become frictionless. One or two clicks are
sufficient to buy, to like or to share, and service providers know about our preferences
facilitating selection of music, audio, restaurants or other products from swathes of offerings.
Such personalization is made possible through online behavioural tracking mechanisms able
to harvest minute details of online activity. A variety of actors aggregate online activity
across populations in order to analyze, profile and serve targeted information. The more
detailed the tracking, the smoother our experience of the Web, and the higher the revenues
for the corporates.

While every small improvement derived from closer tracking and more precise analytics
turns into a sizable business benefit for the trackers motivating them to ever more compre-
hensive monitoring of our lives, there are diminishing returns yielded to the individual. The

3 http://www.rogerclarke.com/II/IWtbF.html

B. Berendt et al.

9

consequence is a deep intrusion into the privacy of individuals, what they do and like, what
their political beliefs are, whom they do business with, and whom they spend their days and
nights with. At best this intrudes people’s privacy and exploits it without fair remuneration,
at worst it may lead to misuse manipulating individuals or deriving damaging conclusions
about them.

Consider a case of manipulation in 2014. Facebook faced a storm of protest after it was
revealed that via an online psychological experiment they were analyzing if they could make
users feel happier or sadder by controlling their feeds. This incident provoked widespread
public concern regarding the effect of such experiments and interventions and the lack of
agreement on expertise and ethics knowledge about how to do experimental Web research.
Consider the topic of possibly damaging conclusions as demonstrated in early experiences
with prototypes of a planned Chinese social scoring system. There have been reports that
individual’s political opinion and even the political opinion of their friends influence the score
and hence impact freedom of movement, ability to work, or chances to date other people.4
Artificial Intelligence techniques, such as text and video understanding, intelligent emotion
recognition, or face recognition, may fully leverage these developments. Then, companies or
governments might have almost complete knowledge about the private life of citizens. One
might have a complete account of traffic rules violations or of CO2 emission with incentives
to avoid both. But one would also incur far-ranging possibilities for misuse of such knowledge
and severe implications on the resulting social behavior of citizens.

2.3 Influence by the Masses vs. Manipulation of the Masses

The Web offers the opportunity for countless people to connect across geographical boundaries
in ways that were difficult to imagine in the context of previous media systems. Since the
inception of the Web, the resulting network allows for a scale and speed of information
dissemination that has been seen as a huge opportunity for democratization, for example
by allowing the wide publication of injustices. A recent example was the German video by
Rezo on Youtube which allowed a previously unpolitical social media influencer to affect the
German political discussion on climate change and political (in-)activity.5

The Web also allows to tap into the “wisdom of the crowd” by sourcing its seemingly
infinite variety of connected entities. However, this network has from its beginning always
held surprises and developed in unexpected ways. While we have made huge inroads into
understanding phenomena of how and when people mutually influence each other, there
is still a lot to learn about how this affects the behaviour of crowds online in the large.
This is especially the case if we look at the less positive aspects of the Web as a public
network. Crowd sourced judgment can be good or bad, depending on how you want to see
the world [54].

The extent to which crowd behaviour may be manipulable or determining at what point
a righteous public outcry may turn into undesirable and vindictive pursuit are not well
understood. And both the positive and the negative sides of the Web may be amplified by

4 Cf., e. g., https://www.wired.co.uk/article/china-social-credit-system-explained on the ambi-

valences of the Chinese social scoring systems.

5 https://www.spiegel.de/wissenschaft/mensch/rezo-video-die-politik-lullt-ein-und-die-

jugend-wehrt-sich-a-1269173.html

1 8 2 6 2

10

Web Science

the possibilities that algorithmic analyses and AI bring. For example, in 2018 it was revealed
that Cambridge Analytica had harvested the personal data of millions of people’s Facebook
profiles without their consent and used it for political purposes (the Facebook–Cambridge
Analytica data scandal), like targeting voters in the US presidential election.6 This was a
turning point in the public understanding of personal data and caused many calls for tighter
regulation of tech companies’ use of data. It also showed that there is a potential to influence
large amounts of people – and uncertainty as to how exactly such influencing works, may
already be at work and who may be trying to influence people.

These uncertainties also became clear in connection with the Brexit referendum when it
turned out that bot accounts may have been used to boost follower numbers for parties on
Twitter.7 This example highlights the uncertainty about the influence of bots: their actual
impact is uncertain as is their power to influence opinions – there certainly seems to be large
potential for it.

Thus, it is clear now that interconnected networks of the Web may influence people for
the better or the worse, but it is neither clear when a purpose turns out to be “good” or
“bad” and who, if anyone, should have the authority and power to make such a judgement.

2.4 Inclusiveness and Fairness vs. Exploitation

The Web has been designed to be inclusive. This means that all individuals, but also all
institutions – companies, associations, governmental or non-governmental organizations –
can make best use of it, contributing their content and data and being able to access it.

While this may sound simple enough, it is not. Even low costs of internet access might
be too high for some to bear. In this context, Facebook’s http://internet.org initiative
proposes to offer for free a limited version of the Web with access to specific Web sites like
Wikipedia as well as to Facebook and Facebook partner businesses. The Indian government
has banned this initiative. The underlying rationale was that this initiative would turn
Facebook into a quasi-monopolistic gatekeeper to the internet in India, such that only
businesses who partnered with Facebook would be able to thrive there. At the same time,
this initiative would have given many people access to some internet opportunities they seek
and any alternative will be more expensive and therefore more exclusive for many of them.
The Web as a system of people, platforms, and economic affairs naturally tends towards
such a monopoly as that internet.org wants to create. Indeed, other monopolies or oligo-
polies exist in the Web, e. g., for mobile phone operating systems, search, social networking,
business networking, shopping, or video hosting, where companies have created free offers that
attracted a majority of people rendering further competition economically unfeasible. While
it seems fair enough that these companies draw a profit from their investments, once these
monopolies/oligopolies have grown large enough, they are the gatekeepers that can exploit
their customers as well as the existing infrastructure and business partners almost at will.
There are fundamental problems in defining what constitutes fair behaviour and what does
not, and the fairness of economic behavior cannot be disentangled from the other questions
raised before, which were the ambivalences of personalization versus privacy violations or
wisdom of the crowd versus mass manipulation.

6 https://www.theguardian.com/news/2018/mar/17/cambridge-analytica-facebook-influence-us-

election

7 Researchers Say Many Of The Brexit Party’s Twitter Followers Aren’t Behaving Like Genuine Voters

https://www.buzzfeed.com/alexspence/nigel-farages-brexit-party-twitter-following

B. Berendt et al.

11

Artificial Intelligence seems to amplify this problem. Progress in AI depends on the avail-
ability of trained researchers and availability of data, both of which are found at the Web be-
hemoths more than anywhere else, and AI allows for those value-added services that are likely
to attract even more customers thus nurturing the spiral that strengthens existing monopolies.
In addition to these challenges to economic fairness and the risk of exploitation, AI and its
uses in the Web also present challenges to fairness in the sense of equalities (of opportunities,
outcomes, etc.) and the risk of discrimination. There is an active discussion as to when AI
systems are fair or when they are biased [62].8

Regulations that aim at creating fairness for all, thus should not only consider the
individual, but they should consider inclusiveness and fairness for all groups. Small companies
and social groups may suffer most from regulations that large companies can deal with. One
of the authors was briefly involved in running a truly free social networking site, Metalcon,
with more than 10,000 users. That social network could not be maintained in spite of its
attraction to new visitors and in spite of free voluntary work, as legal compensations for
copyright breeches provoked by its users far exceeded its minor income.

Further discussions concerning fairness versus exploitation are ongoing considering issues
like net neutrality (especially vivid in USA) or upload filters (especially vivid in Europe).
This should not come as a surprise. While our societies may have improved fairness over the
last centuries at large, there is an ongoing need for improving understanding and discussing
as to what constitutes (un-)fairness – also in the Web.

2.5 Sustainability vs. Growth

The Web happened during what has come to be called the anthropocene, the current
geological age during which human activity has been strongly influencing the climate and the
environment. As a global artefact the Web continues to grow to cover and connect ever more
people, usages, cultures and resources. But leading the Web to its full potential requires us
to strike a balance between its growth and its costs of all sorts: the economical cost of the
infrastructure it requires (e. g., Internet, telco networks) and the maintenance of its resources
(e. g., maintaining and evolving Wikipedia), the ecological cost of its deployment and use
(e. g., Google’s post on powering a search9), the educational cost of the experts it requires
(technical aspects, content production, legal framework, etc.)

And as we will see in Section 3, the encounter of the Web with AI can both amplify or
alleviate this problem [80] as some AI techniques can be used to downscale the resources
needed to operate Web applications [41] and at the same time some of the AI techniques are
consuming a lot of energy [73]. This is also the case with other technology the Web is linking
to such as blockchain [78], the internet of things [39], or mobile and ubiquitous computing,
to name a few.

The emergence and scaling of new capabilities and usages of the Web are not only raising
questions about our ability to sustain the evolution of the Web in terms of energy and money
but in other domains as well. In the educational domain the Web curricula keep growing with
new topics, standards, frameworks, tools, etc. In the legal domain each evolution requires

8 See also the ACM FAccT conference series on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency in socio-

technical systems. https://facctconference.org/

9 https://googleblog.blogspot.com/2009/01/powering-google-search.html

1 8 2 6 2

12

Web Science

the legislator to monitor and control it closely. In other words it is important to not only
consider the full potential of the Web, but also the one we can afford.10

We will therefore use the term “sustainability” in two of its many meanings. The first is
ecological sustainability, i. e., questions regarding the long-term viability of our planet and the
life it supports. The second meaning is the sustainability of the Web itself, i. e., the long-term
viability of the Web as the complex socio-technical system that is evolved by society and
that Web Science co-develops and studies. In addition, in Section 4.4 we will briefly sketch
the connections with the UN’s Sustainable Development Goals, in order to highlight the
close relationship of our notions of sustainability with human rights and social goals. We
understand the Sustainable Web to mean a Web that is long-term viable in this sense – by
considering the goals of ecological sustainability as well as other goals.

2.6 Ambivalences without an End

We have discussed ambivalences of the Web today. It is germane to the Web as a powerful
instrument that such ambivalences that affect human well-being for the better or the worse
will never disappear. However, we, using Web Science as a discipline, must ask ourselves
how to deal proactively with these ambivalences. In the following sections, we will try to
address this question starting with the challenges that the encounter between AI and the
Web is bringing.

3

The Web linking all Forms of Intelligence

Half of humanity uses the Web directly, and nearly all people are affected by it. But this is
only a fraction of the agents who contribute to the Web. More and more human and artificial
forms of intelligence are connected to the Web and participate in its content, structure,
services and all the activities it supports. This section focuses on the opportunities and
challenges of a Web that links all forms of intelligence and the role Web Science and AI
have to play in providing a multidisciplinary approach to enhance the opportunities and to
contain the problems such as the ones we identified in the previous section.

The first section introduces this evolution as a continuation of the historical trend toward
a Web of everything and on everything. We then divide the challenges in evolving Web
Science to study a Web that includes AIs into three sections: challenges at the individual
level (e. g., a user, a software agent), challenges at the level of collaborations of different
forms of intelligence (e. g., hybrid societies over social media), and cross-domain challenges
to highlight the inter-disciplinary nature of the research needed. Before closing this section
we stress the specific potential and challenges in using AI to study and manage the Web and
to help us conduct Web Science research at Web scale.

10 https://www.w3.org/community/wwca/

B. Berendt et al.

13

3.1 A Historical Trend toward a Web of Everything on Everything

When the Web started to spread at the beginnings of the 90s, it was perceived – from a
technical point of view – as a hypertext system distributed over an open set of servers, in
particular over the Internet and described using metaphors of a universal library formed by
linked HTML documents called Web pages and primarily for human consumption. Social
Scientists paid less attention to the technical specifications, but recognised the emergent
social phenomena that these enabled and drew on a range of metaphors to describe this,
including the Web “as culture” and the Web “as community”. In fact, as soon as it started
to spread, the Web also started to reveal to everyone the full potential of the distributed
hypermedia software architecture it had globally standardized and that goes far beyond
the image of a universally shared library [35]. Although the Web was initially open to
contribution (HTTP PUT and POST) this was not widely implemented in the first browsers
and until the mid-90s, with wikis, blogs and forums, for the Web to be re-opened in read-write
mode. This paved the way to numerous new social media applications and a rapid increase in
the number of people using the Web as well as the scale of its content. In parallel, the initial
use of programs to generate pages on the fly opened the way to a second major evolution
of complex Web applications and dynamic pages leading to a deep Web far exceeding the
librarian metaphor and effectively linking programs, as well as people [30]. As programs
became more and more connected to the Web the need to exchange other data than pages
became clear [7], and the Web first separated form (CSS) and content (HTML) to then be
able to exchange different types of content (XML, RDF, JSON) and ultimately became a
place for publishing and linking datasets. Both trends made the Web more machine-friendly
and supported the development of Web-connected devices starting with mobile access to the
Web and leading to the more recent notion of a Web of Things where the Web is now in
position to provide a universal software architecture and framework to access the Internet of
Things (IoT) and program its applications and interfaces.

Figure 1 A Web of everything and on everything.

Despite these different evolution trends, it is remarkable to see that the Web architecture
remains largely one and unique. One Web is now linking documents, people, data, programs,
and virtually anything that can be identified and one Web is accessed via multiple means:
computers, smartphones, watches and a growing heterogeneity of connected things. Together
“Web of everything” and “Web on everything” are two viral and synergistic evolution trends
of the Web: every new device connected to the Web provides more data and more resources
to access and to link and, in return, every new piece of data linked to the Web supports new
applications and provides resources for the connected devices.

In Section 2.1, we have identified the tension between the freedom to contribute information
and the need to ensure the quality of the information we find on the Web. We can now extend
that challenge to everything the Web will connect raising the problems of searching and
finding relevant resources on the Web while ensuring security, certification and authentication
in these connections we make.

1 8 2 6 2

14

Web Science

As a result the Web has become a universal collaborative space for actors that consume
and produce information including all different forms of natural and artificial intelligences.
Web Science was set up to understand the Web and evolve it for the benefit of society,
including the generation of opportunities and the protection of the vulnerable. The linkage
of diverse forms of intelligences necessitates accelerated development of Web Science as a
discipline. As Artificial Intelligence augments the means of the rich and powerful, Web
Science must be developed to leverage opportunities for society as a whole and to protect
weaker member of societies against negative ramifications of a Web of linked intelligences.

3.2 Challenges at the Individual Level: A Variety of Intelligences on the

Web

Figure 2 Connecting and linking a variety of intelligence forms on the Web.

A first challenge we can identify is the one of designing artificial Web intelligence, i. e.,
the study of the specific problems in designing AI agents that are connected to the Web – its
resources and users – with all the heterogeneity, different scales and speeds this involves. AIs
connected to the Web must be robust and benevolent by design as they can potentially be in
contact with billions of users.

Challenge – Benevolence: Ensure that AI brings no harm to Web users and to make
AI Web bots benevolent by design.

A short term objective is the study of new AI approaches to traditional Web tasks that
can benefit from AI, such as indexing, searching, or browsing but also more complex tasks
such as fact checking [5], fraud detection, or protection enforcement to support privacy.

To the technical challenges identified in this section we should add upfront the extension
of the tension identified in Section 2.2 between the ability to adapt and the need to respect
privacy and confidentiality: The more AI techniques are deployed on the Web and its data
the more important it becomes to monitor and control the usage of data they consume and
produce. Inversely, but still on a short term perspective, the Web has the opportunity to
become the most important source of data sets to feed data-hungry AI and the challenge
here is to ensure the Web can provide high quality data sets with the metadata required to
ensure trust and proper usages.

Challenge – Web Intelligence: Include more intelligence in classical Web tasks and
more Web resources in classical AI methods.

The diversity of AI techniques in existence is an asset as it allows for addressing many
types of diversity we find on the Web in terms of content, users, contexts, tasks, usages,
resources, etc. Doing so will require the adaptation and extension to the Web of different
forms of AI – machine learning, knowledge representation and reasoning, constraint solving,
etc. All the domains of AI – symbolic AI to neural AI – should be considered in relation
to the Web: The next revolution may come from a currently very quiet field and the broad

B. Berendt et al.

15

picture of the Web requires all types of expertise. The heterogeneity of the Web resources
and actors in general requires a diversity of methods to manage them. Clearly, supporting
different AI techniques is not enough to cater to a diversity-aware Web but the ability to
combine different techniques might help in providing measures to contain problems. For
instance, some statistical methods could be more robust to noise, some others could be
able to detect malevolent behaviors or a bias [62], and other symbolic approaches could be
useful in certifying the provenance or in explaining the process that produced a dataset or a
result [58]. All of them combined could contribute to address the problem of quality data as
input and output of agents on the Web.

Challenge – Web Resilience: Design a variety of AIs resilient to the Web, its
heterogeneity, different scales and speeds, its noise, open-world nature and uncertainty.

Another challenge is to harness the multidisciplinary nature of Web Science to identify
new ways of simulating, reproducing or engaging intelligence including emotional intelligence,
communication skills, or imagination. A diversity of intelligent skills and new ways to
simulate them in the open-world context of the Web are needed. On this point the Web is
both raising questions and providing first answers by proposing a universal space to link
different forms of intelligent processing such as knowledge-based systems, statistical learning,
learning by reading, wisdom of crowd, etc. Many different sources of intelligence can be
found or connected to the Web.

Challenge – Intelligence Diversity: Understand and harness the diversity of intelligent
skills and behaviours that we need on the Web.

The advent of AI on the Web requires Web Science to evolve toward the studying of a
Web that includes AI agents as first class citizens. The first challenge is to make the Web
“AI-friendly” at the core of its architecture by providing knowledge level means to connect an
AI to the Web. Beyond semantic Web, linked data and knowledge graphs [45], formalization
and models are needed that support the publication and exchange of the many types of
data an AI may want to obtain or provide on the Web including: input data, training data,
output data/results, parameters, configurations, schemata, embeddings, etc. All kinds of
semantic information networks can potentially be exchanged by AIs on the Web including
complete neural networks, layers or sub-networks.

Challenge – AI Friendliness: Augment the Web architecture and standards to turn
the Web into an environment fully supporting the hosting of AI agents.

Compared to other AI domains, an important specificity of AI on the Web is that it will
systematically be in contact with a huge variety of human users. Human-AI interaction on
the Web is an important challenge for interaction design and HCI. In Web-based interaction
with AIs, an increasing number of users can interact with many different AI agents using and
combining multi-modal means such as written chat, voice recognition, gesture recognition,
multi-touch, etc. Moreover, the Web also holds the potential to augment interactions in
particular by providing background knowledge and contextual data that can feed AI, assisting
smarter interactions and supporting, for instance, context awareness [37]. In other words,
the challenges are both to use the Web for better AI interaction and to use AI for better
interactions with the Web.

Challenge – Positive User Experience: Design advanced human-AI interaction on
the Web and assist human-Web interactions with AI support.

1 8 2 6 2

16

Web Science

Finally a special case of interaction with AI is the generation of explanations and
justifications to support trustable human-centered AI on the Web. The challenge is not only
to generate single explanations but to weave a Web of explanations and justifications allowing
users to follow their noses in linked traces possibly distributed over the Web (distributed
data sources, distributed processing) to understand and take ownership of the results and to
achieve decision making.

Challenge – Trust Building: Provide user-friendly explanations, justifications, and
traces of AI activities and results to foster trust and support decision making.

Design for user-friendliness and understandability of explanations should also respond
to diverse abilities and needs (accessibility), and designers must not forget the interests of
indirect stakeholders, who are not necessarily using the Web but are still affected by it.

3.3 Challenges at Group Level: Collaborations of Different Intelligences

on the Web

Figure 3 Shaping hybrid societies of intelligence types on the Web.

The simple fact that complex tasks combine several intelligent abilities – learning, reas-
oning, planning, solving, analyzing, extracting, communicating and collaborating – shows
that Web Science will have to consider the Web evolution toward a multi-AI system. This
evolution is both required and allowed by the distributed Web architecture leading us to the
challenges of building and managing collective intelligence on the Web.

The long term challenge for Web Science is the study and design of human-agent collectives
and social machines including AIs that form hybrid Web societies which include very different
types of intelligence: people, connected animals, connected plants, Artificial Intelligence that
reasons, that learns, or that induces. Consequently we need to study on the Web various com-
binations of possible collectives, interactions and their combinations: human-human, human-
AI and AI-AI. Web Science must consider the different types of groups that will be formed,
from swarms to complex societies with their normative rules, roles, and social constructs.

We have already mentioned that these hybrid communities will require new means
to bridge the semantics used by machines and the semantics used by humans in their
interactions [36]. The challenge will also be to study the interactions of Web AIs with
the resources of the Web (linked pages, linked data, connected objects, etc.) forming the
environment of these forms of intelligence. Moreover, beyond individual interactions, a
challenge will be to study and design the orchestration of these multiple interactions. Web
Science will have to face the problem of this massive interaction design with the Web and
everything it links and AI will have to face the problem of engaging in very different types of
interactions with different forms of intelligence including different kinds of AIs.

B. Berendt et al.

17

Challenge – Hybrid Communities: Support the formation of groups of human and
artificial agents and the interactions within these groups.

In Section 2.3 we mentioned the tension between the wisdom we can gain from the
social activity of the Web and the risk of mass manipulation. This perspective of hybrid
communities is amplifying that challenge of fostering the beneficial social phenomenon and
preventing the dangerous ones as we are putting together billions of users and millions of
software agents.

For instance, one may study the role AI can play in human-agent teaming and the role of
a personal assistance to team members. Moreover, the notion of norms raises the question
of having “laws of Web AI” since a Web AI is at least as dangerous as a robot in terms,
for instance, of harming users by learning and disclosing sensitive knowledge. A complex
question for Web science would then be to incentivize the development of benevolent Web
AI through ethical principles of Web Science research and the study of normative systems
for hybrid societies. Going even further, one could envision the design of Web AI to observe
other Web AI, watchdogs checking the behaviours of other AIs to detect and protect against
unwanted (e. g., unauthorized face recognition), malicious (e. g., forbidden fingerprinting) or
defective AI (e. g., AIs with a bias).

Challenge – Social Contracts: Support the establishment and enforcement of social
rules governing human and artificial agents behaviours within their hybrid communities.

To help communities life cycle and routines and to help users in participating in large
scale groups with large collections of resources, Web Science should study Web-dedicated AI
taking part in online social activities. These goal-driven agents could actively participate
in the online activity and, for instance, foster linkage, interactions and convergence, bridge,
translate, check, or augment our posts and maintain for us an overview of our social context
and activity. They could also prevent or report problems such as bullying, harassment and
polarization. Each of these tasks requires dedicated intelligent processing that would need
to be resilient to the variety of users, (mis)usages and content one can find on the Web.
Ultimately, a very ambitious goal would be to have AIs with skills about human social
interactions and psychological characteristics to help humans face their own humanity on
the Web and help us, as individuals, reach the World-Wide-Web scale.

Challenge – Online Intelligence Augmentation: Support human users online by
helping them understand the complexity of the Web, its (mis)usages and content, and
face humanity in all its complexity on the Web.

This macro perspective also shows that Distributed AI (DAI), in particular, has a rendez-
vous with the Web and its sciences because the distributed nature of the Web calls for
distributed AI approaches. Multi-agent systems and distributed AI blackboards are examples
of distributed AI architectures which, if merged with the Web architecture would allow for
many different kinds of AIs to collaborate worldwide to the benefit of the Web. The AIs
and the multi-agent systems would also in return benefit from the Web, its resources, its
standards, its users and its methods. This trend has already started in some domains (e. g.,
B2B) but is at a very early stage and a conceptual challenge is to study the merging of these
architectures to make the Web DAI-friendly and vice-versa as, so far, these approaches are
more often juxtaposed than merged [13].

Challenge – Distributed Intelligence: Bring together the architectures of distributed
AI and the architecture of the Web.

1 8 2 6 2

18

Web Science

In Section 2.5 we have seen that we need to address the sustainability of the growth
of the Web and of AI techniques [80] and we will have to add to the need for new social
contracts a further need for the Web to respect the limits of growth establishing a natural
contract [68] with our environment.

4

Governance and Regulation of People and AIs in the Web

The ambivalences (Section 2) and challenges (Section 3) of the Web require more than
interdisciplinary analyses and technical progress. They also require systems that regulate the
interactions of players on the Web, both human and artificial – i. e., governance. Governance
comprises all of the processes of governing, whether by a government or other actors, over
a social system, through laws, norms, or power (based on [9]). We include code (or, more
generally, software and hardware) in these categories in line with the adage that “code
is law” [51]. Web governance is complex because moral values, jurisdictions and even
fundamental rights differ across the globe and also change over time. Different values have
to be balanced against each other. What is more, governance itself is a complex undertaking,
especially as much that happens on the Web is not governed by laws alone.

4.1 The Scope of Web Governance

To investigate Web governance, one first needs to delineate what falls inside the scope of
the term. It is closely related to “Internet Governance”, a term that, in the early years
of the Internet, used to refer to the technical core of the Internet: standards for data
transmission, the management of IP addresses and Domain Name Service, and the operation
of the root servers. The concept soon grew in scope. According to the definition published
under the auspices of the UN in 2005, Internet Governance comprises “the development and
application by governments, the private sector and civil society, in their respective roles, of
shared principles, norms, rules, decision-making procedures, and programmes that shape the
evolution and use of the Internet”.11 We propose to delineate “Web governance” analogously,
by substituting “Web” for “Internet” in this definition.

In spite of the continuing importance of the governance of the technical basis (such as
Web protocols), attention is thus shifting to a wide array of social governance questions.
Questions center on how much influence each sector of society should have on the development
of the Web and how issues such as freedom of speech and censorship, attempts to influence
elections, misinformation, hate speech and cyber-bullying, data protection, privacy violations
and surveillance should be approached. In addition, with the rise of collaborations of different
forms of intelligence, the laws, norms, powers and languages governing AI are more and more
relevant for how the Web evolves.

With the Web becoming increasingly interwoven into all fabrics of life, it could be argued
that all societal norms, rules etc. co-shape the evolution and use of the Web. This could
render the term “Web governance” overly wide or even redundant. However, it still remains
In the following section, we will illustrate such
possible and important to delineate it.

11 https://publicadministration.un.org/en/internetgovernance

B. Berendt et al.

19

attempts at delineation with the help of examples, concentrating on legal approaches that
show how the non-trivial interactions between different realms of governance play out in
practice.

4.2 Balancing Ambivalences through Legal Web Governance

Laws have been and are being implemented by states and supra-national bodies such as the
European Union. These laws govern what is legal (or not) on the Web and how violations of
these rules can be sanctioned.

“The use of the Web” (as one domain of Web governance) can comprise, in principle,
many domains of human activity. For example, people may use the Web to plan a murder.
The associated communicative acts may constitute a conspiracy to commit a crime, which in
itself is sanctioned by the criminal law of many jurisdictions. The legal status of the acts
may not be affected by their happening online, and in this sense this “use of the Web” is not
an object of Web governance. However, states increasingly pass laws and take actions to
intercept such communications (in attempts to prevent crimes from happening), and it is
these laws and actions, which do fall under the heading of “Internet/Web governance”, that
have manifold implications also on other communications. For example, attempts at targeted
surveillance of suspicious behaviour and individuals often results in dragnet surveillance of
unrelated individuals. Dragnet surveillance is not only unethical, but in many jurisdictions
also illegal (cf. the arguments around NSA surveillance brought forward in connection with
the Snowden revelations). Similarly, the push by some governments for backdoors into
encryption schemes would not only allow law enforcement to intercept communications that
they may legally intercept, but it would break the confidentiality of all communications,
thereby infringing on the rights of innocent individuals. Thus, privacy violations can result
from the mathematical-technical aspects of the Web as a communication medium.

Challenge – New Interdependencies: Mathematical and technical aspects of digital
communications can lead to mission creep and collateral damage of governance measures,
and Web governance needs to take these interdependencies into account.

In addition and as discussed in Sections 2.2 and 3.2, privacy violations can be a flipside
of personalisation and other data analyses. Data protection legislation is one form of
governance addressing these risks of “uses of the Web”. We will explain the interactions with
Web governance using the example of the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR),
the European Union’s (EU) data protection law, which regulates also non-EU actors if
they process data of EU citizens (this includes search and social-network giants). The
GDPR regulates the processing of personal data, and its first top-level aim is to protect the
fundamental rights and freedoms of natural persons. The law therefore covers the processing
of personal data in any form, ranging from hand-written data to big data on the Web. At the
same time, much of today’s personal-data processing is Web-based, and a second top-level
aim of the GDPR is to “ensure the free flow of personal data between [EU] Member States”,
a type of processing that typically involves Internet/Web structures. Core GDPR principles
and more specifically regulated concepts include general issues around personal data such as
purpose limitation, data minimisation, and transparency and accountability, but they also
include issues that typically (even if not exclusively) arise in Web-based and Web-scale data
processing, such as profiling. In addition, there are uses of the Web and other data sources
that have developed through Internet/Web-level-scale processing of personal data (such as
group profiling) which are not regulated well through this law, which focusses on protecting

1 8 2 6 2

20

Web Science

individuals. In addition, some of its mechanisms (such as the large reliance on individual
consent as a lawful ground for data processing) are increasingly regarded as ineffective in
practice. As a consequence, many – but not all – characteristics of data processing that
emerge from the technical and applications infrastructure of the Web combined with the way
people use the Web, become the subject of the GDPR, giving the law an important role in
Web governance.

Profiling based on personal data can not only violate rights to data protection and privacy,
it can also lead to unfairness and discrimination (Section 2.4). The GDPR recognises this
threat in a recital, thus clarifying that discrimination must not result from data processing,
but it does not specify concrete rights or duties. Since discrimination is illegal anyway, and
Web-related laws thus as of now refer to general anti-discrimination laws, we expect that
this will be an area in which the case law side of governance will play an important role
in regulating discrimination via networked AI (cf. the court case against the personalised
delivery-assignment algorithm in the app of a food delivery company, the first of its kind in
Europe, in which the plaintiff trade union claims discrimination [23]).

Challenge – Limitations to Coverage: Laws need a certain degree of technology
agnosticism in order to protect effectively and for extended periods of time. On the
other hand, they need to respond to technology-typical effects. This will usually lead to
some threats not being covered. Case law, and other forms of governance, are needed to
compensate for these gaps.

Some threats of mis- and disinformation (see Section 2.1) are addressed by laws. Being
untruthful does violate laws in some circumstances: when being a witness in a court of law,
when reporting business results as a public limited company, with respect to information
given out as a public official, etc. Being untruthful about a person is sanctioned by laws in
many jurisdictions when the untruths can have severe impacts on a person, e. g., in cases of
defamation. Other laws outlaw types of speech such as threats of criminal acts against the
person or incitement to hatred.

On the Web, the lines between such hurtful speech become blurred, and the increasingly
used term “hate speech” captures many different phenomena. Some forms of hate speech
therefore fall under the governance of general laws. However, Web-specific aspects including
speed and range of distribution as well as business models of social media platforms, have led
to a proliferation of such forms of speech and to platforms arguable neglect of their duties to
counteract such content.

Some countries have therefore created specific laws that constitute specific Web governance.
An example is the German Network Enforcement Act (NetzDG), designed to enforce a
functioning complaints management system in large social-network platforms, imposing
heavy fines if these do not remove content that has been flagged to them as violating specific
illegal forms of speech. This approach – to refer to laws outside the narrow scope of Web
governance, coupled with Web-governance-specific legal measures – however fails to cover
forms of hate speech that are not currently covered by laws (such as doxing12 and other
threats). The boundaries between accepted and non-accepted speech are changing, and
therefore it can be expected that legal regulation will change as well.

Other countries and the EU itself have implemented or are debating laws specifically
In the wake of allegations
against misinformation, hate speech, or cyber-bullying [25].
concerning election manipulation, some countries have decided to regulate speech in pre-

12 Broadcasting private or identifying information, for example people’s home address.

B. Berendt et al.

21

election times, and to address specifically influence by foreign-national actors.13 In general,
the balancing between free speech and the protection of individuals who may fall victim to
the free speech of others, is handled differently in different countries, as witnessed by the US
view of freedom of speech as a near-absolute fundamental right (cf.,) e. g.,, [32]).

However, there are no general “laws against lying”, and there probably should not be
such laws, given the fine line, in many contexts, between mis-/disinformation, bias, and
freedom of speech, as well as the positive roles that omissions and even white lies can have
for social cohesion. This can become a serious problem if (as with climate-change denial
speech) lies affect and endanger all of humankind (and the planet as a whole). Our legal
systems generally focus on protecting individuals and are therefore ill-equipped to handle
such threats. The question is whether specific lies will come to be recognised as illegal (such
as holocaust denial is in Germany). Similarly, there are and probably cannot/should not be
general “laws against expressing hatred”, and the balancing of the fundamental rights of the
haters and the hated remains an ongoing challenge.

Restrictions on which content may be distributed via the Web may also be based on a
balancing against other interests and rights, such as intellectual property (IP) and copyright.
Laws that have created wide-scale protests such as the EU Directive on Copyright in the
Digital Single Market (which needs to be implemented in national laws in the Member States
by June 2021) attempt to enforce proportionality in these balancing acts. Arguably, these
protections too can contribute to mis- and disinformation (Section 2.1), as when IP-based
restrictions of access deprive the public of relevant information (e. g., scientific publications
not in open access, or copyright laws used to combat critical reporting online [50]).

These examples of phenomena that are in need of, and increasingly addressed by, forms
of law-based Web governance also demonstrate that conflicts are inevitable. Typical conflicts
between criminal justice and fundamental rights such as the privacy of communications have
already been described in the first example. The protections afforded by data protection and
protections from hate speech and related phenomena, as well as the protection of intellectual
property, on the other hand, often conflict with interests in the freedom of information or
freedom of speech. Openness and freedom of speech, and also decentralisation, have been
founding principles and values of the Web community. Not only can this tradition conflict with
the restrictions on speech imposed in different jurisdictions (whether Web-specific or general,
see [22] for an overview of how restrictions on speech are key elements of most jurisdictions),
but these restrictions also differ between countries and cannot easily be enforced globally.

Challenge – The Need to Balance Rights, and to Recognise the Effects of the
Context of Web Speech: Web ambivalences are often also conflicts between different
rights (often fundamental rights of natural persons), and these always have to be balanced
in governance systems that consider themselves fair and just. At the same time, laws
and case law have to recognise the specific effects of speech on the Web, such as its huge
speed, reach, and therefore possible impact.

4.3 Governance of Artificial Agents

The examples above all centered on “uses of the Web” by natural persons as well as private
and state organisations. With the role of AI increasing and hybrid societies becoming Web

13 France’s law concerning the fight against the manipulation of information (loi relative à la lutte contre

la manipulation de l’information) is an example of this.

1 8 2 6 2

22

Web Science

users (see Section 3.3), Web governance will also have to regulate the “uses of the Web”
by artificial agents. One example are autonomous agents on the Web, such as bots, which
can play major roles both in spreading information and misinformation via the Web (see
Section 2.3). What should these agents be allowed to do or not do? Who will be liable when
things go wrong? Lawmakers may in the future draw on current activities such as regulations
concerning what autonomous vehicles are allowed to do and not do on public streets, and
how questions such as liability for accidents are handled [46].

Challenge – Governance of Artificial Agents: Should artificial agents become
first-class citizens on the Web also in legal terms? What rights and duties do they have,
and how can responsibility, liability, and sanctions be regulated?

4.4 Beyond Laws

Norms as another approach to governance are developed and enacted at different levels.
One is corporate governance and self-regulation. For example, with the help of human
fact-checkers and automated classification, social media companies have tried to combat the
spread of misinformation across their platforms, sometimes in efforts to obviate legislation.
One advantage of non-legal governance processes is that ethics-related desiderata that are
difficult or impossible to formalise into law can be addressed. This may not be instigated by
management, but also or only by workers and employees. Recent examples are the protests
by Google employees against the company’s participation in weapons development [69], or
the price surges created by Uber drivers in an attempt to raise their earnings to acceptable
levels and raise public awareness of their working conditions [42].

NGOs and not-for-profit organisations are further types of governance actors. The focus
may be on how to govern the organisation itself (an example is the Wikimedia Foundation
Governance system) or on monitoring other actors (an example is AlgorithmWatch).

Ethics-based desiderata and governance norms may also arise via codes of conduct that
professional associations give themselves (relevant examples for Web Science include the AoIR
Recommendations for Ethical Decision-Making and Internet Research [63] and the IEEE
Ethically Aligned Design Guidelines [31], the ACM’s Statement on Algorithmic Transparency
and Accountability [16]) or that national or supra-national bodies create (such as the EU’s
2019 Ethics Guidelines for Trustworthy AI [14]).

Professional norms will remain key to addressing some of the ambivalences that cannot
be addressed by laws alone. For example, journalistic codes of conduct mandate truthfulness
and objectivity, and media regulation measures and attempts to foster diversity to both allow
for desired biases and combat undesired biases. For these measures to succeed in mitigating
mis- and disinformation, they however need to be combined with regulation of platform
providers and changes in the consumption and sharing behaviour of end users.

Code itself is an instrument of governance [51, 65]. For example, the music industry has
witnessed many attempts to technically block behaviours that were seen by the industry and
some creators as detrimental to their interests: the sharing of media files between users. The
code-based approaches include Digital Rights Management (to control access and copying),
streaming (to not even create a media file on the user’s device) and content inspection and
upload filtering algorithms (to detect unwanted storage of copyrighted content).

Last but not least, infrastructures are instruments of governance. This fact has been
thrown into stark relief by recent debates over who owns and controls the infrastructures
of connected mobile devices (one of the most important physical platforms for Web usage).
Early in 2020, the Covid-19 pandemic spurred a worldwide push to develop smartphone

B. Berendt et al.

23

apps for contact tracing and exposure notification, designed to break infection chains. A
debate evolved around the question of whether software protocols should be centralised or
decentralised. Many countries and regions opted for decentralisation, arguably mirroring
(among other things) decentralisation as a fundamental principle of the Web. Code and
tracing apps built on either decentralised or centralised protocols can comply with the
GDPR [27, 60].14 However, both types of systems are limited by restrictions posed by the
devices, their operating systems and overall infrastructure, which are built and controlled by
Apple and Google, the quasi-monopolists of the global smartphone market [70].

Power relations and perceptions change over time, and this impacts possibilities and
impact of governance. For example, the GDPR is now, after much initial industry lobbying
and claims to the effect that it would hamper innovation, hailed by many as an example
for legislation protecting personal data and privacy. Conversely, after more than a year
of NetzDG application in Germany, there appears to be no evidence of the over-blocking
by social-network platforms that had been feared by many civil-society advocates. As the
Snowden revelations have illustrated, laws on national security passed by dominant nations
govern how individuals around the world can (or cannot) effectively exercise their fundamental
rights and freedoms, including those afforded to them by their own countries’ laws. Tech
giants wield enormous power over citizens and conceivably even over elections and thus the
fabric of democracy.

It has also been argued that the blocking of content that violates economically powerful
companies’ copyright, enters laws and is enforced faster and more thoroughly than the
blocking of content that violates vulnerable individuals’ and groups’ personality rights, even
though the technical processes to detect and block such content may be similar. Within
companies, ethics-related desiderata formulated by management become binding rules for
governance more easily than those formulated by workers and employees.

Power is not in itself bad or good, and it exists and will exist in one way or other in all
communities and societies. What governance can and should do is control power and ensure
that the powerful are held to account. Importantly, governance has to create structures
and processes that ensure that control and accountability will continue to function and to
make sure that human rights are and remain protected. The global agreement on human
rights and social goals is best described by the UN’s Declaration of Universal Human Rights
and the UN Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). The discussions around the SDGs
show the interdependencies between human rights, sustainability in the ecological sense, and
peace, justice and strong institutions (the latter specifically named as SDG 17). While this
holds for economic and social rights such as food and health and for justice against violent
crimes, similar interdependencies hold for political and civil rights such as those discussed in
the current section, and for justice against violations of these rights. We therefore posit a
challenge modelled on SDG 17.

Challenge – The Need for Justice and Strong Institutions: All governance systems
are faced with (often economic) power and interests. The ambivalences and conflicts
between these have to be addressed, and power has to be controlled and held to account,
by strong institutions focussed on justice.

14 The European Data Protection Board adds that “[i]n general, the decentralised solution is more in line

with the [data] minimisation principle” [27, p. 9].

1 8 2 6 2

24

Web Science

4.5 Global Web Governance

It appears likely that any global, Web-scale agreement on rights and on the need for weighing
different rights against each other in governance processes will only be possible at the level
of the UN. The ongoing quest for a declaration or even bill of digital human rights [40] may
realise the ROAM Principles, endorsed in 2015 by UNESCO’s General Conference, which
state that the internet should be “(i) Human Rights based (ii) Open, (iii) Accessible to all,
and (iv) Nurtured by Multistakeholder participation”.

As discussed in Section 2.5, it is becoming increasingly clear that in addition to human
rights, we also need to think of the rights of other beings, nature and ultimately the planet.
Towards sustainability in this sense, local, national and global governance activities are
needed. Towards this end, Web users and Web science will have to ask themselves the same
questions that need to be asked about non-digital resource use. The Web in its current form
and development consumes large amounts of energy and resources [48, 80], and it is poised
for growth: streaming content, higher bandwidth, the push to ever more documentation and
(over?)sharing. Is it desirable and realistic to reduce these activities and thereby the Web’s
resource consumption? Or is the only possibility “green growth” based on renewable energies
and materials? These questions and decisions will contribute to the already well-known
local and global conflicts concerning climate accords. In addition, they will interact with
Web-specific conflicts of interest. For example, should the trend to ever more streaming of
content be stopped by less energy-hungry text formats? How would this affect accessibility
or the delicate balance around intellectual property rights (see Section 4.4)?

Challenge – Global Collaboration on Web Governance: For governance to succeed
and to contribute to sustainable outcomes, many stakeholders and forms of governance
have to collaborate, across sectors and across the globe. Conflicts are unavoidable.
Structures and processes for effecting such collaboration need to be (re-)negotiated and
maintained continuously.

5

Extending Web Science to Address Ambivalences of the Web

Understanding the Web, its current and future trajectories through AI, demands that we
craft new approaches at the intersections of traditional disciplinary practice. As the object of
our study evolves and the necessity for collaboration across disciplines and with researchers
in industry and government becomes ever-greater, it is urgent that we innovate our methods
and research infrastructures accordingly.

Key challenges for Web Science at present are as follows:
How can we unlock the promise of interdisciplinarity inherent in the vision of Web Science?
How can we engage with AI for Web Science research?
How to share data, algorithms and tools between researchers and with industry?
How to create inclusive and robust public debate about the Web and its futures?

In the following we explore how these issues might be addressed.

5.1 Collaborative Research and Shared Infrastructures

Drawing together strong social research questions with engineering approaches allows Web
Scientists to accomplish valid and ethical social science research with Web data towards

B. Berendt et al.

25

understanding and impact. Three clear benefits of such a collaboration are (i) that both
communities can unlock new sources of data for Web Science research (ii) that social science
training includes a strong focus on critical analysis of ethics, methods, and effects (iii) and
that engineering has a more intuitive knowledge and understanding of industry practice
(by inference at least). There are various examples of how such collaborations are starting
to manifest in shared infrastructures. New models for access to data and tool sharing are
starting to emerge, from Web observatories [77] to online tools specifically aiming to Open
Web data to interdisciplinary communities15. Examples include:

building Web Science data archives, data management tools (for documenting research
processes throughout a project’s lifetime) and infrastructures
sharing algorithms across the academy and through dialogue with industry partners to
develop innovative practices and mechanisms for collaboration
actively seeking collaborations across domains and keeping the door open for including
new disciplines in Web Science

Such infrastructures must benefit from the latest AI techniques to support mixed research
methods at a Web scale: For example, AI techniques can help researchers (and data archivists,
curators and others) perform a number of tasks required for collecting and compiling datasets
that adhere to scientific best practice and are of shareable quality, such as detecting bias or
enforcing anonymity in the data.

Challenge – Collaboration and infrastructures: Collaborative work and shared
infrastructures such as observatories and repositories allow for leveraging the strengths
from different communities for everyone.

5.2 Boundary Objects for Interdisciplinarity

Academic disciplines work with a variety of objectives and thus have developed often in-
commensurable epistemologies. Especially, there are very different ideas within the social
sciences and computer sciences as to what constitutes a method or how knowledge should be
derived. Often there is a misalignment of interests, for example, if social scientists would
like computer scientists to become “epistemic partners” [12] in the collaborative production
of theories and knowledge while computer scientists would like social scientists to inform
the design and building of content and infrastructure and thus expect a particular type of
results from the research [49]. Web Science has been calling for interdisciplinarity since
its beginning and has been providing platforms for interdisciplinary work for a long time.
There is a large potential in integrating a comprehensive understanding of the data with
sophisticated computational methods [43]. However, transcending established knowledge
frameworks to build new understandings is difficult and demands not only to take risks and
to deal with uncertainty but also requires patience and indulgence.

Finding common points of interaction and discussion can be beneficial to an interdis-
ciplinary process. For example, visualisation offers particular potential for interdisciplinary
collaboration, to draw together technical methods for data exploration associated with Data
Science with domain expertise from other disciplines. Whilst data scientists can identify
patterns, they do not (usually) have the expertise to interpret the results substantively. And,
whilst social scientists and humanities scholars understand their field of practice in detail,

15 http://mediamonitoring.gesis.org/

1 8 2 6 2

26

Web Science

they do not (usually) have the expertise to engage with data science, at least not to the
depth of the possibilities that are emerging with AI. Visualisations may operate as “boundary
objects” [10] where data science methods can display results in a way that is intelligible by
domain experts, and domain experts can question the techniques and methods that are used
for data interrogation, e. g., by ruling out irrelevant patterns or suggesting changes to the
parameters of data interrogation.

Visualisation is thus not only about communicating results and presenting findings: It is
required to make results understandable, but it needs to be a concern from the beginning,
not just at the end of a research project [33].

Visualization can enable an interdisciplinary “interviewing” of data – of enabling a dialogue
between data, method and theory – using iterative visualisations to support abductive
reasoning. The complexity of data makes formulating hypotheses very difficult, and one way
of allowing such formulating could be through a dialogue where we query the data and refine
ideas in an iterative process. This could allow computer scientists and social scientists to
work together, to bring theory and data into dialogue much earlier in the process, by looking
at the same data, asking questions, visualizing the data in different ways. An example is
Visual Analytics / Visual Data Mining, where questions are derived from the data, to derive
new hypotheses.

Questions could then become how we might be able to map interviewing methods used in
the social sciences (e. g., expert interviews, semi-structured interviews employing an interview
guide, biographical interviews) to how we might interview data; can we map social science
methods of interviewing to different computation techniques? Can visualization allow us to
annotate quantitative data with qualitative information?

Collaborating in crafting and interrogating visualizations would allow us to innovate in
interdisciplinarity, to find new ways to collaborate on an eye-to-eye level, especially between
computer scientists and social scientists.

Challenge – Action: Joint “interrogation” of visualizations is a way to bring different
methods into dialogue from the beginning and to unlock the potential of interdisciplinarity
for understanding the Web and its intelligences.

5.3 Engaging with AI for Web Science Research

Over the coming years, Web Science will focus closely on the emergence of Artificial Intelligence
and its implications for the Web. However, AI tools also hold various potential for Web
science research itself, enabling us to observe, analyse and intervene in the evolution of the
Web and may even serve as boundary objects for interdisciplinary processes.

In line with the focus detailed above (i. e., accessing the strengths of interdisciplinary
collaboration by building shared and collaborative infrastructures) one interest of Web Science
in the endeavour of both understanding and making use of AI is in the role of data and
their management. The open and linked data facet of the Web is of particular importance
when considering the links between AI and Web (science) data. Intelligent agents can help
us produce, curate, share and maintain corpora and datasets. For instance AI techniques can
be designed to check certain formal quality criteria of a dataset, look for bias in it, or address
issues such as loss of context. AI can be also used for simulations producing data and to
generate synthetic data, thus addressing privacy concerns. AI can thus be used to produce

B. Berendt et al.

27

datasets that are meaningful to Web Scientists from various disciplinary and methodological
backgrounds (and in particular to social science inquiry). The study and design of high
quality datasets allows their usage beyond Web Science, e. g., for the training of AIs.

Inversely, Web Science can produce multidisciplinary methods and tools to certify and
characterize training sets to improve the quality of the learning and conclusion made by
AIs using them. To support such an endeavour reproducible research and dataset sharing
need to become a core feature in Web Science research. They are required to support
the use of provenance to understand how content is generated. Data sharing architectures
therefore are required to agree on standards for vocabularies, metadata (of various kinds) and
criteria for establishing trust in the architecture. Importantly, this trust not only concerns
the three dimensions of confidentiality, integrity and availability of data, but their more
complex quality criteria such as transparency of data provenance, support for ethical scrutiny
of data processes, support for assessing its validity, etc. to allow for reproducibility and
(multidisciplinary) secondary use of the data.

In its endeavour to understand and engage with AI, Web Science can be seen as building a
research program as a joint effort with two research fields born in the 50s: “AI” for Artificial
Intelligence [56] and “IA” for Intelligence Amplification [4] and Intelligence Augmentation
[28]. While AI focuses on methods to simulate and scale automated intelligent behaviours,
IA focuses on methods to amplify intelligence with systems where human intelligence is at
the center from the start. As a universal platform linking all kinds of intelligence, the Web
has the potential of being the meeting point for AI and IA. But many open questions will
have to be addressed in Web Science to reconcile these two historical trends.

For example, the Web already is populated by Web bots but they usually are restricted
to certain realms while they could be generalized. How could we generalize the bots as
the ones of Wikipedia to bots on the open Web designed to monitor and preserve certain
characteristics of the Web? AI might be used to detect and counter-attack some undesirable
network effects. Starting with defining the Web we want, how can AI help? For instance,
could we design agents that would derive high-quality recommendations without having
centralized data repositories?

As a first step, and from the infrastructure point of view, we could imagine Web farms for
Web AIs hosting autonomous agents that would study, monitor and report on the Web. Then
benevolent AI for the Web (e. g., watchdogs for the Web) could be used to regulate, as AI
hold the promise of supporting diversity on the Web and of preventing unwanted behaviours
such as bullying. Problems that could be targeted by Web bots include the detection of
metrics manipulation (e. g., link farms), cross-language plagiarisms, centralization or digital
divides, vandalism or spamming etc. The bot agents would need to be based on policies
and values important to a philosophy of the Web that seeks decentralization and equality of
access to improve the Web’s resilience.

Web agents working to improve users’ experience, understanding, awareness and control
of their participation and contributions to the Web would also support such a philosophy.
For instance, educational AI could help educate Web users in many domains including Web
literacy or ethical thinking. Agents could also provide customized descriptions of the context
in which a user is, including security, neutrality and privacy notices or his human-computing
participation when it occurs. As mentioned before, AI could also help users burst filter
bubbles and foster serendipity. In the long term, benevolent AIs could actively help enforce
(human) rights on the Web and be scrutiny agents for important values of the Web.

At the start of this section we stressed that workflows and data are key drivers of Web
Science; we then went on to explain how the multidisciplinary nature of Web Science also
puts it in an ideal position to explore and expand the forms of intelligence on the Web. First,
both Web Science and AI are highly multidisciplinary [34] and the multiple disciplines that

1 8 2 6 2

28

Web Science

are common to both fields act as bridges to make them interact. AI could also be used to
operationalize the expertise from each domain into agents that help us provide assistance,
reporting or training from the domains they represent. These agents could help us find and
support a massively multidisciplinary method and allow us to scale to the multi-disciplinary
interactions required by the design and study of the Web. One possibility, for instance,
would be for these AI agents to produce and maintain boundary artifacts at the frontiers of
disciplines.

Challenge – Tooling: Leverage AI tools for Web Science.

5.4 Participatory Methods: a Web “For Everyone”

In thinking about the future of the Web, Web Science must engage with multiple and often
competing stakeholders. The Web does not belong to anyone and it must meet the needs of
everyone. As Web Scientists it is our responsibility to ensure that the full range of voices
is heard as we build our understanding of the Web and seek to shape its future. In order
to achieve this, we are committed to working with participatory methods that allow us to
gain insight of diverse perspectives and build dialogues between these. Questions of ethics
and responsible innovation have become pressing questions for Web Science. How do we
ensure that Web technologies are ethical? That they are designed and implemented in ways
that take into account potential harms? This is not simply a question of “ethical approval”
for Web Science research but a wider “ethics of care” towards the kind of society we are
making [55, 19], as we work to shape the Web towards the future. This means working
with citizens as well as governments, community groups as well as businesses, to ensure
that the future of the Web takes into account the diverse views, feelings and needs of all its
stakeholders.

There are already some good models for collaboration with government and business
– co-funding of research, knowledge exchange partnerships, even joint-research – and it is
important that we extend these in the coming years. However we also need to extend
collaboration with citizens and communities to enable meaningful participation and effective
voice in shaping the future of the Web. These methods may include citizen science, whereby
individuals participate in distributed models of data collection and analysis [11].

Similarly citizen social science can be used to encourage people to participate in research
on areas of particular concern or interest to their lives and communities16. We should also
consider how new and emerging forms of data can be used for community purposes, not just
for recommender systems and targeted advertisements. For example, Web Science research
has already developed environmental pollution apps to inform asthmatics which parts of cities
to avoid [74], and built platforms for open data sharing and community-relevant analytics [1].
Beyond these excellent examples of “tech for good” we should also think about empowering
citizens to be active in debates about the future of the Web, through education in schools,
and through concerted efforts to build “anticipatory capacity” [3, 53, 2]; and thorough specific
online mechanisms that encourage deliberative democracy [21] and actively seek to build
widespread participation [75].

16 See

projects/citizen-social-science-methods-for-social-research/
maynoothuniversity.ie/

https://www.socialsciences.manchester.ac.uk/social-statistics/research/
http://letters1916.

or

B. Berendt et al.

29

Challenge – Action: Continuously working towards finding innovative, caring forms of
citizen participation allows to build democratizing facets of the Web.

5.5 The Role of Web Science in Governing the Web

The complex governance processes described in Section 4 open up possibilities for intervention
for individual researchers, platforms, other private and public actors, governments, and supra-
national bodies. Example methods for intervention include, e. g., (i), embedding of ethical
concerns and values in the design and revision processes (such as value-sensitive design
and reflective methods [17, 18]), (ii), affirmative/corrective action, and, (iii), the raising of
awareness.

An important role for Web scientists is to study, describe and analyse the socio-technical
system of the Web, for example to contribute a scientific view to supplant media and policy
discourse that is often carried out in ideological and emotional terms. The gathering and
analysis of a strong evidence base is an important task for Web Science. Principled evaluations
of the processes and successes of legal as well as self-regulation efforts are another important
area for Web-Science research. A further key contribution are critical analyses of the ideals
invoked by laws and other professional, national and international agreements, such as the
investigation of multi-stakeholderism in Internet Governance by [24]. Especially given the
pervasive and dynamic power structures across the Web, critical research on governance and
its evolution is another key task for Web-Science research and policy advice.

In hybrid human-agent environments, often unexpected situations arise that may require
affirmative or corrective actions. Risk analysis during the design phase and before deployment
may help preview some possible risks and to be pro-active as well as reactive. Existing laws
may provide effective means against some risks, and unexpected means against other risks (cf.
the proposal to use copyright law to combat revenge porn [52]). Emergencies can arise from
feedback loops, and when these involve also or only artificial agents, they easily become fast
and large-scale runaway feedback loops (as observed with Tay, a bot designed to learn jokes
but ending up learning to be a racist from the human Twitter users it interacted with [61];
or the stock-market trading algorithms that created the 2010 Flashcrash [29]). Important
questions about human and non-human agency arise that need to be addressed in order to
ensure that Web content and services remain transparent and controllable and responsive
to advice and, where possible, also draw on research findings. A positive example is the
reaction of the social network platform nextdoor.com to the occurrence of racial profiling of
neighbours by neighbours: Users who referred to “race” when posting to “Crime & Safety”
forums were prompted to provide additional information, such as hair, clothing, and shoes,
which helped reduce the occurrence of racial profiling [71].

In different roles, we are also responsible for informing users, the public, and other
stakeholders. We can and should raise awareness about technical possibilities and facts
(such as the presence and activities of bots [14]) and about what is regulated by laws (e. g.,
due diligence to clarify liability questions, bot content production in Wikipedia as a case
of public speech). Information activities can aim at raising awareness, and they can also
aim at changing behaviours in certain directions, from nudging to forcing. Nudging towards
behaviours may operate via information about psycho-social effects and nudging towards
attitudes such as empathy. Well-known examples from the Web include differences between
online and offline behaviour (in terms of social checks and balances that are missing online),
and the reductions in empathy often associated with cultural or spatial distance.

1 8 2 6 2

30

Web Science

However, most informing and certainly all nudging or forcing rests on values and choices,
and neither can be assumed to be “good” in and of itself [20, 6]. Self-reflection about these
values and choices, and about whether and how to integrate which other parties’ values
and choices, is as important as the attempt to be “ethical” itself. This has impacts on the
definition and implementation of the concept of “benevolence” that was introduced above.

Challenge – Action: Web science can and should leverage its interdisciplinary potential
for shaping and analysing the Web along entire life cycles of Web-based systems: for
analysing and demonstrating what works and what does not, for designing systems that
take these insights into account, and for recognising when it hits the limits of academia
and needs to collaborate with non-academic stakeholders.

5.6 Futures of Web Science

As Web Science evolves with the Web, so too it becomes apparent, and indeed pressing, that
our methods evolve. At the beginning of Web Science this meant integrating robust social
science methodologies with the engineering methods of computer science. This has proven
both more difficult and more rewarding than originally imagined, and still we continue to
learn about how to do it better. As we look towards Web Futures, we must innovate again.
This will include engaging with AI for Web Science research. And it will also mean adjusting
Web Science research to the emergent AI Web. As the Web becomes ever more heterogeneous,
to include animals, plants, ships, rocks (and so it goes on) we need to think about how we
research these new networks, their activity end effects, the opportunities and the challenges
that they present, not only for Web Science but for the future of the Web. And we must
do so in a context where the continued growth of the Web is a pressing question for the
sustainability of the planet. Environmental Web Science is as yet in its infancy and we will
need to draw in new disciplines, from the life sciences in particular, and new approaches that
help us to research, understand and intervene in this truly inclusive Web.

6

Capacity Building

The Web is not fixed or finished. It remains open to possibilities, of all kinds. The very
properties of openness, flexibility and dynamism that drove its growth now threaten its
future (Section 2). As we move towards a Web of AI (Section 3), both the challenges and
opportunities are amplified. We are already all too familiar with hate speech, cybercrime,
violations of privacy with data and algorithmic bias, for example. These social problems and
risks may become worse as AI drives new methods of information proliferation, individual
profiling and targeting, and the means to override security systems. And there will be
challenges that we cannot even imagine as yet – this much we know from the history of
the Web. Yet, at the same time, AI brings opportunities. Opportunities to harness the
Web in positive and progressive ways, to counter the morally unacceptable and criminal
activities more efficiently and effectively than ever before and to provide resources for human
prosperity and well-being.

It is a matter of pressing global concern that we support these opportunities and tackle
the challenges, in the present and with a clear focus on the future societies that we are
making. This is no simple matter. It raises

B. Berendt et al.

31

political questions of competing interests, across sectors and between nations;
philosophical questions about moral standpoints;
social questions about inclusion, inequality and power;
legal, ethical and practical questions about regulation, sanctions and enforceability; and
technical questions about the architecture, operation and accountability of Web techno-
logies.

These are questions for us all, and demand that we build the capacity to answer them as a mat-
ter of urgency. Getting to the answers demands a radical acceleration of the new forms of know-
ledge – across the established disciplines – that have been pioneered by Web Science. And it
demands robust long-term participatory mechanisms to link research with the wider education
system, with industry, policy makers and citizens, to create an ecosystem that can build on-
going socio-technical and inclusive capacity to face the challenges and shape the opportunities.
In this section, we outline the actions that can be taken by different stakeholders in the
Web ecosystem to build this capacity and bring forward a future Web that is more inclusive,
more intelligent, more sustainable, more collaborative.

6.1 Actions to be Taken by Researchers

Web Science researchers have made great strides forward in integrating social and technical
understandings of the Web. They need to and will continue to apply the best methods from
individual disciplines and to develop these methods further. However, more remains to be
done to achieve the capacity required to face current challenges effectively.

1: Supporting Interdisciplinarity: The plethora of questions raised cannot be answered by
any discipline on its own. Hence, researchers must resist “research silos”. Researchers
must avoid academic wars between schools of thoughts and rather work on bridging,
benchmarking, and hybridizing. They must leverage or create recognized and highly
ranked venues that award recognition for interdisciplinary results.

2: Supporting Collaboration: In spite of a momentum towards fragmentation [64], the Web
is a global phenomenon that cannot be understood from a national or regional point of
view. Hence, researchers must collaborate at global scales, they must actively share their
problems as well as their resources. This includes the sharing of data sets beyond the
boundaries of domains, cultures, or disciplines [72], and the dealing with cultural, legal
and other challenges that may arise from such intentions to share.

3: Supporting the Sustainable Web: Research must provide facts and raise awareness about
the implications of our digital lives on the environment and the climate informing
organizations and government to support behaviour change. Research might support the
individual, too. For example, research on interaction design might show which interfaces
best reconcile computing objectives with environmental strains. In addition, researchers
can contribute by developing and using more sustainable technologies and practices, and
by highlighting rebound effects in which increases in consumption/deployment neutralise
or even reverse such progress, as illustrated in Section 2.5.

4: Supporting the Intelligent Web: The Web is a showroom and testbed for AI research.
With increasing power of AI research, there is a growing potential for AI research on the
Web to harm people calling out for the protection of people when AI takes its infant steps
on the Web. AI researchers need to adapt review boards as known from medicine and
the social sciences to protect their work from overpromising the good and overdelivering
the bad – for the sake of AI and the Web.

1 8 2 6 2

32

Web Science

5: Supporting the Inclusive Web: The influence of research on politics is more limited than
some researchers wish. To influence policy making, researchers must actively collaborate
with stakeholder groups and recognize their contributions to society. Many stakeholder
groups share the objective of shaping the Web for a better future. Positive influence in
the Web comes from many stakeholder groups: NGOs (like International Fact Checking
Network17 or Freedom House18), customer protection agencies, labour unions19, and many
more aim to make the Web a better place. Researchers can build greater collaboration
with partners in the Web ecosystem, to ensure more widespread and effective knowledge-
exchange with businesses, governments, state agencies and civil society in order to accel-
erate understanding and innovation for an inclusive approach to the evolution of the Web.

6.2 Actions to be Taken by Academic Institutions and Funding Agencies

Academic institutions as well as funding agencies achieve effects by setting up or funding
organizational structures and rewarding people. Rewards are issued along a range of well-
understood incentives imposed by academia and funding agencies.

The cross-cutting concerns of the Web run counter to the organizational structures
imposed by academic institutions and funding agencies as well as to major parts of the
reward structures (e. g., promotions). To support the Web, academic institutions and funding
agencies need to change. As most academic institutions and funding agencies depend on the
political will that funds them, suggested actions must not be considered in isolation from
political support for structural changes as indicated in Section 6.5 below.

1: Supporting Interdisciplinarity: Interdisciplinary courses are most effective if co-lectured
by researchers from two disciplines, which increases the price per teaching unit. Inter-
disciplinary research is harder to publish and interdisciplinary basic research projects
are scarcer and harder to get than disciplinary ones. Implied costs cannot be borne by
the individual academic, as a further increased workload would jeopardize both their
career and their health. Hence, reward structures must be modified towards supporting
the novelty of approaches and the diversity of research and other outcomes in order to
support interdisciplinary approaches.

2: Supporting Collaboration: A global understanding of the Web improves the prospects of
all, students, researchers, academic institutions, and society. Organizational measures
of sharing beyond institutional boundaries and funding initiatives may improve overall
knowledge about the Web enhancing effectiveness and efficiency of academia. Mundane
examples include information and resource/data set sharing, such as websites that list
courses, introductory texts, or example data.

3: Supporting the Sustainable Web: Beyond sustainability in terms of overconsumption of
physical and environmental resources, such as energy or atmosphere capacity for CO2,
the existence of the Web is threatened by its ambivalences. Uncertainty, vagueness and
conflicting objectives will require an evolving, but also never-ending academic dialogue.
Academic institutions must respond to this need supporting a constant vigilance, scrutiny,
and reflection with discussions on public platforms, in teaching programmes and through
continued support for Web Science research initiatives, even at low tides of funding
cycles. Funding agencies must provide support for understanding the Web without pauses

17 https://www.poynter.org/ifcn/
18 https://freedomhouse.org/report-types/freedom-net
19 http://faircrowd.work/unions-for-crowdworkers/

B. Berendt et al.

33

that disrupt and destroy academic knowledge. In addition, institutions and funders can
incentivise research on sustainability as well as professional practices that save resources.
4: Supporting the Intelligent Web: At this point in time, there is a proliferation of new AI
institutions. Few of them, however, embrace the Web as a topic of its own and tackle AI
on the Web. Thus, a broader and interdisciplinary perspective is lacking, although the
ethics, laws, and politics concerning AI in the Web are issues right now.

5: Supporting the Inclusive Web: Academic institutions are biased towards people from
specific regions of the worlds, social classes and gender. Beyond the generic problem of the
‘leaky pipeline’, the effect that gender parity becomes less and less balanced over academic
career progression, the Web itself is a filter that may reward Web-extroverts, but deter
those that shy away from Web activity, e. g., to avoid misogyny online [47]. Academic
institutions must promote diversity programmes and research applied to reducing all
types of divides that threaten the universal accessibility of the Web, whether it is by
being physically or mentally challenged, economically limited, or socially intimidated.

6.3 Actions to be Taken by Educators

Guiding the Web into the future requires a long-term perspective that carries all its stakehold-
ers into the future. It is essential that all citizens develop Web literacy, i. e., the competence
and the capacity to engage knowledgeably in public debate and discourse on and about the
Web. Education and educators play a pivotal role to achieving this goal.

Supporting the Sustainable Web: Many of the Web’s problems cannot be solved once and
for all. To ensure the long-term viability of the Web, we need a process of civilizing the
Web that ultimately builds on mutual understanding and respect as can only be developed
with the help of education at large.

Supporting the Intelligent Web: Intelligent behavior of, in and by the Web is not given
as a fact, but emerges from actions and actors. As teachers, we need to educate how
intelligences can behave for the better or worse, how they can be used or how they might
misguide us.

Supporting the Inclusive Web: As a society, we must aim for and increase inclusiveness. As
teachers we must strive to recognize exclusion and open our eyes and the eyes of others,
young and old, to where and when people are ostracized on the Web.

Supporting Interdisciplinarity and Collaboration: Teaching about the Web is more inter-
disciplinary than what most teachers can or will be able to accomplish. Hence, teachers
need to collaborate, including across disciplines and with their students, to achieve a joint
understanding across disciplines, generations and social groups.

Educators must not be left alone with solving the issue of teaching Web literacy. Programs
must be developed that educate about consumption in and of the Web (searching skills,
critical reading, fact checking, Web usage and privacy), about contribution to the Web
(Wikipedia, social media), and about related aspects from technology to data analytics to
social science studies.

6.4 Actions to be Taken by Enterprises

The business models of all large and most small- end medium-sized enterprises revolve around
or are deeply affected by the digital economy. Hence, all these enterprises rely on a Web that

1 8 2 6 2

34

Web Science

is reasonably secure and protects their interests as well as those of their customers. This
implies that enterprises must take action to safeguard this ecosystem.

Supporting Interdisciplinarity: In the past, engineering companies might have built cars and
sold them to customers. In the future, mobility companies need to revise their thinking
about when and for which life situation a customer needs which mobility service. Why
and when would the customer feel safe and secure and trust this service, and when not?
How would the customer contribute to a digital ecosphere that makes the enterprise’s
platform more valuable than the one of others and that provides her with a tailor-made,
optimized solution?
Such questions are asked now, and not only in car companies, and they will become even
more important in the future. Answers require the collaboration of people from a multitude
of disciplines: engineers, computer scientists, economists, sociologists, psychologists and
others. To ask and to answer these questions enterprises need models and expertise as
provided by Web Science.

Supporting the Sustainable Web: Enterprises rely on the long-term viability of their busi-
ness models, which includes evolution, adaptations to changing circumstances, and
sometimes revolutionary changes to strategy.
Increasingly, business models that are not ecologically sustainable are coming under attack
from various sides, including customers, investors and regulatory bodies and governments.
Enterprises also need to ensure the long-term viability of their business networks aligned
to help customers fulfill their objectives (aka “customer ecosystem”). Attention to such
developments, innovation and self-regulation can answer some of these demands and,
even if they come at the expense of short-term revenue, increase the long-term viability of
business models and enterprises, and thereby also make the parts of the Web that these
enterprises support more sustainable.20 Laws and regulations may stifle some business
models, and they may also drive innovation and new services/products and markets with
GDPR being a recent example.

Supporting the Intelligent Web: Commercial AI advances are not only propelled by the
Web, they are also more early visible in the Web than anywhere else. Downsides range from
the merely annoying, such as incapable chatbots, to phenomena that affect the governing
of nations, e. g., when information platforms regulate or do not regulate information
diffusion. While in the discussion of AI and ethics, future versions of the trolley problem
are discussed at length, AI and the Web has received little attention.
For example, AI contributes to automatically deleting billions of social media posts
and accounts per year21, and the decision is often wrong, because AI is nowhere near
understanding the nuances of harassment, hate speech or misinformation.22

20 Examples include Tumblr forbidding pornographic content, Instagram limiting the viewing of number

of likes, and Twitter denying political advertisements.

21 Cf., e. g., https://about.fb.com/news/2018/05/enforcement-numbers/.
22 AI-based filters by themselves are unable to protect fundamental rights.

it
has been observed that they block legitimate speech while at the same time tolerating non-
legitimate speech in the same domain: Many antisemitic German tweets remain unfiltered whereas
the account of the only German-Jewish weekly newspaper was automatically blocked (“Zensur
im Netz: Twitter blockiert ‘Jüdische Allgemeine’”, 2019, https://www.tagesschau.de/inland/
twitter-juedische-allgemeine-101.html); Islamophobic tweets run free while a Muslim politi-
cian was blocked after mentioning Muslims (“Berliner Politikerin Chebli: Twitter-Account von SPD-
Staatssekretärin zeitweise gesperrt,” 2019, https://www.faz.net/aktuell/wirtschaft/unternehmen/
twitter-begruendet-sperrung-mit-falschinformation-ueber-wahlen-16173579.html).

For example,

B. Berendt et al.

35

Supporting Collaboration: To support the intelligent Web that enterprises seek to increase
their profits, they must embrace the collaboration with the intelligent in the Web.
Enterprises must seek more proactive interaction with the public, with academia, with
NGOs, making good use of participatory methods and being open to regulation. While
this may hurt business in the short term, it may be unavoidable to achieve long-term
goals such as efficiency, customer trust, and even innovation.

Supporting the Inclusive Web: Datafication of businesses may make unfair practices of
enterprises more visible. Society is less willing to accept these and expects companies to
take advantage of available data and make their businesses more inclusive.
The presence of regulation on inclusion not only leads to obstacles on the way to profit
making, it can also help create new products and business models and to include previously
excluded individuals and groups into the workforce.

Based on ubiquity, inclusion, intelligence, and collaboration, the Web allows for sharing
products, services, and events (transport, accommodation, repair, experiences etc.) that
would never have been shared before. This sharing economy of the Web has enabled novel
enterprise opportunities for value creation. Now, we need to become creative to use the
sharing economy for reducing, not worsening23, physical and environmental footprints.

6.5 Actions to be Taken by Policy Makers

Policy makers and state agencies play a double role when they interact with Web Science. At
one end, they impose conditions that constrain how the Web, and Web Science, operate and,
thus, are critical to shaping the future of both. Also, they determine support for academia
and funding agencies at large, nurturing or impeding Web Science research.

At the other end, policy makers and state agencies might benefit from knowledge provided
by Web Science, researchers, practitioners and think tanks – helping to bring forward laws
and regulations that would be based on more profound knowledge and hence better serve
society.

Supporting Interdisciplinarity: As yet, we do not have a “joined up” approach to Web related
policies across governments, e. g., linking education policy with policy supporting technical
innovation and policy on the environment. Developing problem-focussed research for
policy making, drawing in necessary expertise, is key to achieving such a cross-cutting
approach.

Supporting the Sustainable Web: The technical infrastructure of the Web consumes enorm-
ous amounts of energy and creates hazardous waste, while the systems that operate on
the Web (e. g., cryptocurrencies) have taken energy consumption to the level of indi-
vidual nation states.24 It is imperative that innovative solutions are found to incentivize
stakeholders and regulate future technologies supporting innovation for climate and
environment protection.

Supporting the Intelligent Web: Artificial Intelligence is an area that is in the focus of
governments, e. g., the European Commision [15]. As Dignum et al. [26] review: “Com-
mission takes up a rule setting role... In our opinion, this is a good first step. If we were

23 https://www.transportenvironment.org/news/uber-and-lyft-increase-pollution-and-

undermine-public-transport-study-shows

24 https://www.economist.com/the-economist-explains/2018/07/09/why-bitcoin-uses-so-much-

energy

1 8 2 6 2

36

Web Science

to draw the analogy with a game, independently of who is playing the game, without
rules no one wins.” The same applies for the intersection of AI and the Web, which is so
omnipresent in our digital lives that it warrants dedicated attention on its own – which it
has not received, yet.

Supporting the Inclusive Web: It is a difficult task for politicians to formulate the laws that
bring forward a civilized Web [64]. To date, policy makers have occupied a largely reactive
position, chasing the Web as it has evolved and rarely equipped with the cutting-edge
knowledge to make timely interventions in this domain.
Laws for inclusion exist, but often they are not enforced. At the technical level, many
concepts and tools exist that enhance Web accessibility25, but few Web sites actually
implement these ideas. At the social level, datafication provides the basis for monitoring
fairness, but no legal consequences are drawn from such data. At the societal level, the
digital divide must be reduced and intimidation of benevolent users must be prevented.
Thus, laws that target the inclusion and the safety of all the must be redrawn to include
evaluation and continuous improvement of their effectiveness.

Supporting Collaboration: The Web is global and its phenomena are crossing sectors of life.
Hence, policy makers must organize and enable collaboration at all scales. The Web is
an issue for our global society and it must be addressed internationally. This requires
action comparable to other large transcontinental efforts, such as the Square Kilometre
Array26, the fusion reactor ITER27, or the International Space Station28.
The careful, scientific sharing of Web data must be made possible by laws. There are
models for sharing medical or social science data, which must be transferred to Web
Science such that scientific investigations are made possible. The individual must be
protected, but also the societal interest of learning about social cohesion, democracy
and public security must not be neglected, even when the data is owned by private
corporations. Public discussion of these laws will require time in order to achieve a broad
consensus on the models and their purposes.

Taking such support measures will not be possible by individual policy actions. Rather,
policy makers will need to create organizational structures that allow them to provide such
support: (i), the Web is a fundamentally international affair, but regulatory bodies for the
Web are virtually non-existent. (ii), policy makers should and must rely on Web expertise,
but no comprehensive expert structure exists. Industry takes a view that is biased in several
ways. And academia alone cannot provide the expertise. It finds itself between the rock of
over-competition, which makes service to society at large ungratifying if not impossible, and
the hard place of struggling for interdisciplinarity without having the means to really do so.
Policy makers must create spaces for bringing together all Web stakeholders, researchers,
industrial practitioners, interest groups, and politicians, but only in this way government
will have the most profound expertise to guide their policy making – especially at time when
the Web is moving so fast. These issues are deeply challenging and urgent.

25 https://www.w3.org/WAI/
26 https://www.skatelescope.org
27 https://www.iter.org/
28 https://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/station/main/index.html

B. Berendt et al.

7

Conclusion

37

The Web has evolved from a Web of documents to a Web that is so omnipresent that societies
almost take it for granted and spend little thoughts about it. At the same time the Web
affects individual lives, economies as well as national and international politics. The next
wave, which is already visible now, will be a Web that links all forms of Intelligence and that
continues to evolve at accelerating speed. A new wave of AI, powered to a great extent by
the phenomenal data resources largely created by the Web and by the global infrastructure
of the Web, has begun a new round of transformations with unforeseen impacts on the Web
futures and the future of our world.

The “Web is a never ending project” [35] and perpetual changes are at the very core of
the Web. Change is neither good nor bad and as with every change, there is the potential to
bring as much disruption as benefit. We cannot stop change, therefore the question is how
we deal with change and in particular, how we embrace it as an opportunity for reflection
on the past and to guide us in the future while staying loyal to Web’s founding values of
information sharing and inclusiveness.

As our societies are faced with increasing levels of complexity and uncertainty, and as the
future, deeply impacted by new technologies, is an open space of possible developments that
we cannot foresee, we cannot hope that the problems of the Web will magically disappear.
We have therefore to accept its ambivalences and to build resilient processes with the capacity
to provide all the required safeguard mechanisms. We must find out how to prevent negative
consequences of the technology, how to detect emerging problems and how to react via timely
and effective interventions. The role of Web Science with its different disciplines is to reduce
the time between a problem arising and (intermediate) solutions being found.

The Web is for everyone and everyone is also responsible for the Web and its “healthy”
operation. Individual responsibility can range from protecting your private information
to reporting misuse of information and respecting others online. Paraphrasing John F.
Kennedy’s historic words:

Ask not what the Web can do for you – ask what you can do for the Web.

Individual actions are desperately needed to incur collective actions and systemic change.
By the latter we do not want to reduce the responsibilities borne by stakeholders and other in-
stitutions, rather we want to highligh the importance of both individual and collective actions.

1 8 2 6 2

38

Web Science

8

Participants

Robert Ackland (Australian

Fabien Gandon (INRIA Sophia

Paolo Parigi (Airbnb and

National University –
Canberra, AU)

Ricardo A. Baeza-Yates
(NTENT – Carlsbad, US &
Northeastern Univ., US)

Bettina Berendt

(TU Berlin and Weizenbaum
Institute for the Networked
Society, DE & KU Leuven, BE)

Noshir S. Contractor
(Northwestern University –
Evanston, US)

David De Roure (University of

Oxford, GB)

Kemal A. Delic (Hewlett

Packard – Grenoble, FR)

Nikolaus Forgó (Universität

Wien, AT)

Antipolis, FR)

Susan Halford (University of

Bristol, GB)

Wendy Hall (University of

Southampton, GB)

Lynda Hardman (CWI –

Amsterdam, NL)

Stanford University – San
Francisco, US)

Evaggelia Pitoura (University

of Ioannina, GR)

Oshani Seneviratne

(Rensselaer Polytechnic, US)

Andreas Hotho (Universität

Elena Simperl (University of

Würzburg, DE)

Southampton, GB)

Katharina E. Kinder-Kurlanda

(University of Klagenfurt, AT)
Claudia Müller-Birn (FU

Berlin, DE)

Wolfgang Nejdl (Leibniz
Universität Hannover, DE)
Eirini Ntoutsi (Freie
Universität Berlin, DE)

Steffen Staab (Universität
Stuttgart, DE & University of
Southampton, UK)

Guglielmo Tamburrini
(University of Naples, IT)

Pinelopi Troullinou (The Open
University – Milton Keynes, GB)

References

1 Giovanni Allegretti and Sofia Antunes. The Lisbon participatory budget: results and
perspectives on an experience in slow but continuous transformation. Field Actions Science
Reports. The journal of field actions, Special Issue 11, 2014.
S. Amsler and K. Facer. Contesting anticipatory regimes in education: exploring alternative
educational orientations towards the future. Futures, 94:6–14, 2017.

2

3 A. Appadurai. The Future as Cultural Fact. Verso, London, 2013.
4 Ross Ashby. Design for an intelligence-amplifier. Automata studies, 400:215–233, 1956.
5

Ipek Baris, Lukas Schmelzeisen, and Steffen Staab. CLEARumor at SemEval-2019 task
7: Convolving ELMo against rumors. In Proceedings of the 13th International Workshop
on Semantic Evaluation, SemEval@NAACL-HLT 2019, Minneapolis, MN, USA, June 6-
7, 2019, pages 1105–1109, 2019. URL: https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/S19-2193/,
doi:10.18653/v1/s19-2193.

6 Bettina Berendt. AI for the common good?! Pitfalls, challenges, and ethics pen-testing.

Paladyn, 10(1):44–65, 2019. doi:10.1515/pjbr-2019-0004.

7 Tim Berners-Lee, Robert Cailliau, Ari Luotonen, Henrik Frystyk Nielsen, and Arthur Secret.
The World-Wide Web. Commun. ACM, 37(8):76–82, 1994. doi:10.1145/179606.179671.
8 Tim Berners-Lee, Wendy Hall, James Hendler, Nigel Shadbolt, and Daniel J Weitzner.

Creating a science of the Web. Science, 313(5788):769–771, 2006.

9 M. Bevir. Governance: A very short introduction. Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK,

10

11

2012.
J. Bowker and S.L. Starr. Sorting Things Out: Classification and its’ consequences. MIT
Press, Cambridge, MA., 1999.
Irene Celino, Oscar Corcho, Franz Hölker, and Elena Simperl. Citizen science: design and
engagement (dagstuhl seminar 17272). In Dagstuhl reports, volume 7. Schloss Dagstuhl-
Leibniz-Zentrum fuer Informatik, 2018.

12 Karin Knorr Cetina. Epistemic cultures: How the sciences make knowledge. Harvard

University Press, 2009.

13 Andrei Ciortea, Simon Mayer, Fabien Gandon, Olivier Boissier, Alessandro Ricci, and
Antoine Zimmermann. A Decade in Hindsight: The Missing Bridge Between Multi-Agent
Systems and the World Wide Web. In AAMAS 2019 - 18th International Conference on

B. Berendt et al.

39

Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, page 5p, Montréal, Canada, 2019. URL:
https://hal-emse.ccsd.cnrs.fr/emse-02070625.

14 European Commission. Ethics guidelines for trustworthy ai, 2019. URL: https://ec.

15

europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/news/ethics-guidelines-trustworthy-ai.
European Commission. On Artificial Intelligence — a European approach to excellence and
trust. Technical report, European Commission, Brussels, BE, February 2020. Whitepa-
per. URL: https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/commission-white-paper-
artificial-intelligence-feb2020_en.pdf.

16 ACM US Public Policy Council, 2017. URL: https://www.acm.org/binaries/content/

17

assets/public-policy/2017_usacm_statement_algorithms.pdf.
Loy D. Watley. Training in ethical judgment with a modified Potter box. Business Ethics:
A European Review, 23(1):1–14, 2014. doi:10.1111/beer.12034.

18 Mathieu d’Aquin, Pinelopi Troullinou, Noel E. O’Connor, Aindrias Cullen, Gráinne Faller,
and Louise Holden. Towards an "ethics by design" methodology for AI research projects. In
Jason Furman, Gary E. Marchant, Huw Price, and Francesca Rossi, editors, Proceedings of
the 2018 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society, AIES 2018, New Orleans, LA,
USA, February 02-03, 2018, pages 54–59. ACM, 2018. doi:10.1145/3278721.3278765.

19 María Puig de La Bellacasa. Matters of care: Speculative ethics in more than human worlds,

volume 41. U of Minnesota Press, 2017.

20 R. De Wolf, E. Vanderhoven, B. Berendt, J. Pierson, and T. Schellens. Self-reflection
on privacy research in social networking sites. Behaviour & Information Technology,
36(5):459–469, 2017.

21 R. Dean, J. Boswell, and G. Smith. Designing democratic innovations as deliberative
systems: The ambitious case of NHS citizen. Political Studies, 2019. Advanced online
publication. doi:10.1177/0032321719866002.

22 Ronald J. Deibert, John G. Palfrey, Rafal Rohozinski, and Jonathan Zittrain. Access Denied:
The Practice and Policy of Global Internet Filtering (Information Revolution and Global
Politics). MIT Press, 2008.

23 CGIL (Confederazione Generale Italiana del Lavoro [Italian General Confederation of
Labour]. Riders: CGIL, causa contro multinazionale food delivery per condotta
URL:
discriminatoria, algoritmo penalizza diritti di sciopero e malattia, 2019.
http://www.cgil.it/riders-cgil-causa-contro-multinazionale-food-delivery-
per-condotta-discriminatoria-algoritmo-penalizza-diritti-di-sciopero-e-
malattia/.
L. DeNardis and M. Raymond. Thinking clearly about multistakeholder internet governance.
In GigaNet: Global Internet Governance Academic Network, Annual Symposium 2013,
2013. Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2354377 or http://dx.doi.org/
10.2139/ssrn.2354377.

24

25 Deutscher Bundestag – Wissenschaftliche Dienste. Regulierung von Hate Speech
in sozialen Netzwerken durch EU-Mitgliedstaaten [regulation
und Fake News
of hate
states],
2018. WD 10-3000 -032/18, https://www.bundestag.de/resource/blob/566942/
a5eb997872bbe5dbca3f47112eb04c46/wd-10-032-18-pdf-data.pdf.

in social networks by eu member

speech and fake news

26 Virginia Dignum, Catelijne Muller, and Andreas Theodorou. First analysis of the EU
whitepaper on ai. Technical report, ALLAI, February 2020. URL: http://allai.nl/first-
analysis-of-the-eu-whitepaper-on-ai/.

27 European Data Protection Board (EDPD). Guidelines 04/2020 on the use of loc-
ation data and contact tracing tools in the context of the COVID-19 outbreak, 21
April 2020. URL: https://edpb.europa.eu/sites/edpb/files/files/file1/edpb_
guidelines_20200420_contact_tracing_covid_with_annex_en.pdf.

1 8 2 6 2

40

Web Science

28 Douglas C Engelbart. Augmenting human intellect: A conceptual framework. SRI Summary

Report AFOSR-3223, Stanford Research Institute, 1962.

29 Omer Farooq, Salman Ahmed Khan, and Sadaf Khalid. Financial ethics: A review of 2010
flash crash. International Journal of Computer and Information Engineering, 8(6):1652–1654,
2014.

30 Roy T Fielding and Richard N Taylor. Principled design of the modern Web architecture.

ACM Transactions on Internet Technology (TOIT), 2(2):115–150, 2002.

31 The IEEE Global Initiative for Ethical Considerations in Artificial Intelligence and Autonom-
ous Systems, 2016. URL: http://standards.ieee.org/develop/indconn/ec/ead_v1.
pdf.
32 B. Fox.

speech’,
lock horns with EU justice
2018. EURACTIV, https://www.euractiv.com/section/freedom-of-thought/news/
campaigners-lock-horns-with-eu-justice-chief-on-hate-speech/.

chief on ‘hate

Campaigners

33 Peter Fox and James Hendler. Changing the equation on scientific data visualization.

34

35

36

37

38

Science, 331(6018):705–708, 2011.
Fabien Gandon. The three ’W’ of the World Wide Web call for the three ’M’ of a Massively
Multidisciplinary Methodology.
In Valérie Monfort and Karl-Heinz Krempels, editors,
WEBIST 2014 - 10th International Conference, volume 226 of Web Information Systems and
Technologies, Barcelona, Spain, 2014. Springer International Publishing. doi:10.1007/978-
3-319-27030-2.
Fabien Gandon. For everything: Tim Berners-Lee, winner of the 2016 Turing award for
having invented. . . the Web. 1024 : Bulletin de la Société Informatique de France, 11:21,
2017. URL: https://hal.inria.fr/hal-01843967.
Fabien Gandon, Michel Buffa, Elena Cabrio, Olivier Corby, Catherine Faron Zucker, Alain
Giboin, Nhan Le Thanh, Isabelle Mirbel, Peter Sander, Andrea G. B. Tettamanzi, and
Serena Villata. Challenges in Bridging Social Semantics and Formal Semantics on the Web.
In Hammoudi, S., Cordeiro, J., Maciaszek, L.A., Filipe, and J., editors, 5h International
Conference, ICEIS 2013, volume 190 of Lecture Notes in Business Information Processing,
pages 3–15, Angers, France, 2013. Springer. URL: https://hal.inria.fr/hal-01059273.
Fabien Gandon and Alain Giboin. Paving the WAI: Defining Web-Augmented Interactions.
In Web Science 2017 (WebSci17), pages 381–382, Troy, NY, United States, 2017. doi:
10.1038/nbt0609-508.
Paul Gaskell. Forecasting financial markets with online information. PhD thesis, University
of Southampton, Faculty of Business, Law and Art, 2015. URL: https://eprints.soton.
ac.uk/393779/.

40

39 K. Georgiou, S. Xavier-de-Souza, and K. Eder. The IoT energy challenge: A software
perspective. IEEE Embedded Systems Letters, 10(3):53–56, September 2018. doi:10.1109/
LES.2017.2741419.
L. Gill, D. Redeker, and U. Gasser. Towards digital constitutionalism? Mapping attempts
to craft an internet bill of rights. Technical report, Berkman Center Research Publication
No. 2015-15, 2015. Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2687120 or http:
//dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2687120.

41 Christophe Guéret, Victor de Boer, and Stefan Schlobach. Let’s “downscale” linked data.

42

43

44

IEEE Internet Computing, 18(2):70–73, 2014.
Seda Gurses, Rebekah Overdorf, and Ero Balsa. POTs: The revolution will not be optimized?
CoRR, abs/1806.02711, 2018. arXiv:1806.02711.
Susan Halford and M. Savage. Speaking sociologically with Big Data: Symphonic social
science and the future for Big Data research. Sociology, 51(6):1132–1148, 2017.
James A. Hendler, Wendy Hall, and Noshir Contractor. Web science: Now more than ever.
IEEE Computer, 51(6):12–17, 2018. doi:10.1109/MC.2018.2701637.

B. Berendt et al.

41

45 Aidan Hogan, Eva Blomqvist, Michael Cochez, Claudia d’Amato, Gerard de Melo, Claudio
Gutierrez, José Emilio Labra Gayo, Sabrina Kirrane, Sebastian Neumaier, Axel Polleres,
Roberto Navigli, Axel-Cyrille Ngonga Ngomo, Sabbir M. Rashid, Anisa Rula, Lukas
Schmelzeisen, Juan Sequeda, Steffen Staab, and Antoine Zimmermann. Knowledge graphs,
2020. arXiv:2003.02320.

46 Viktória Ilková and Adrian Ilka. Legal aspects of autonomous vehicles – an overview. In
Proceedings of the 2017 21st International Conference on Process Control (PC), Štrbské
Pleso, Slovakia, June 6 – 9, pages 428–433, 2017. doi:10.1109/PC.2017.7976252.
Emma A. Jane. Online misogyny and feminist digilantism. Continuum, 30(3):284–297, 2016.
doi:10.1080/10304312.2016.1166560.

47

48 N. Jones. How to stop data centres from gobbling up the world’s electricity. Nature,

561:163–166, 2018. doi:10.1038/d41586-018-06610-y.

49 Katharina E Kinder-Kurlanda. Ethnography in a computer science centered project. In
ICC’14 Workshop, ACM WebSci’14 Conference, Bloomington. Online: http://www. icc. ecs.
soton. ac. uk/papers/icc14_submission_2. pdf, 2014.

50 Dave Lee. How scientology changed the internet. BBC News, 2013. URL: https://www.

bbc.com/news/technology-23273109.
L. Lessig. Code and Other Laws of Cyberspace. Basic Books, 1999.

51
52 Amanda Levendowski. Using copyright to combat revenge porn. 3 N.Y.U. J. INTELL.
PROP. & ENT. L., pages 422–446, 2014. Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=
2374119 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2374119.

53 R. Levitas. Utopia as Method: the imaginary reconstitution of society. Palgrave Macmillan,

London, 2013.

54 Annette Markham. Fabrication as ethical practice: Qualitative inquiry in ambiguous internet

contexts. Information, Communication & Society, 15(3):334–353, 2012.

55 Aryn Martin, Natasha Myers, and Ana Viseu. The politics of care in technoscience. Social

56

57

58

Studies of Science, 45(5):625–641, 2015.
John McCarthy, Marvin Minsky, Nathaniel Rochester, and Claude Shannon. A proposal
for the Dartmouth summer research project on Artificial Intelligence, August 1955. URL:
http://raysolomonoff.com/dartmouth/boxa/dart564props.pdf.
Panagiotis Takis Metaxas and Eni Mustafaraj. From obscurity to prominence in minutes:
Political speech and real-time search.
In Proceedings of the WebSci10: Extending the
Frontiers of Society On-Line, April 2010.
Luc Moreau, Paul T. Groth, James Cheney, Timothy Lebo, and Simon Miles. The rationale
of PROV. J. Web Semant., 35:235–257, 2015. doi:10.1016/j.websem.2015.04.001.
59 Eni Mustafaraj and Panagiotis Takis Metaxas. The fake news spreading plague: Was it
preventable? In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM on Web Science Conference, WebSci 2017,
Troy, NY, USA, June 25 - 28, 2017, pages 235–239, 2017. doi:10.1145/3091478.3091523.
60 CNIL (Commission nationale de l’informatique et des libertés). La CNIL publie son deuxième
avis adressé au parlement sur les conditions de mise en œuvre de SI-DEP, Contact Covid, Vac-
cin COVID et TousAntiCovid [The CNIL publishes its second advice to parliament about the
conditions of implementation of SI-DEP, Contact Covid, Vaccin COVID and TousAntiCovid],
21 January 2021. URL: https://www.cnil.fr/fr/la-cnil-publie-son-deuxieme-avis-
adresse-au-parlement-sur-les-conditions-de-mise-en-oeuvre-de-si-dep.
61 Gina Neff and Peter Nagy. Automation, algorithms, and politics — talking to bots: Symbiotic
agency and the case of Tay. International Journal of Communication, 10:17, 2016.
Eirini Ntoutsi, Pavlos Fafalios, Ujwal Gadiraju, Vasileios Iosifidis, Wolfgang Nejdl, Maria-
Esther Vidal, Salvatore Ruggieri, Franco Turini, Symeon Papadopoulos, Emmanouil Krasan-
akise, Ioannis Kompatsiaris, Katharina Kinder-Kurlanda, Claudia Wagner, Fariba Karimi,
Miriam Fernandez, Harith Alani, Bettina Berendt, Tina Kruegel, Christian Heinze, Klaus
Broelemann, Gjergji Kasneci, Thanassis Tiropanis, and Steffen Staab. Bias in data-driven

62

1 8 2 6 2

42

Web Science

AI systems — an introductory survey. WIREs Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, 2020.
doi:10.1002/widm.1356.

63 AoIR (Association of Internet Researchers), 2012. URL: https://aoir.org/reports/

ethics2.pdf.

65

66

64 Kieron O’Hara and Wendy Hall. Four internets: The geopolitics of digital governance.
Center for International Governance Innovation, 206, December 2018. URL: https://www.
cigionline.org/publications/four-internets-geopolitics-digital-governance.
J.R. Reidenberg. Lex informatica: The formulation of information policy rules through
technology. Texas Law Review, 76:553–593, 1998.
S. Saad, S. Bazan, and C. Varin. Asymmetric cyberwarfare between Israel and Hezbollah:
The Web as a new strategic battlefield. In Poster Proceedings WebSci’11, June 14-17 2011,
Koblenz, Germany, pages 1–4, 2011.
Sabrine Saad, Muriel Chamoun, and Stéphane B. Bazan.
Infowar on the web: When
the caliphate goes online. In Proceedings of the ACM Web Science Conference, WebSci
2015, Oxford, United Kingdom, June 28 - July 1, 2015, pages 53:1–53:3, 2015. doi:
10.1145/2786451.2786487.

67

68 Michel Serres. The natural contract. University of Michigan Press, 1995.
69

Scott Shane and Daisuke Wakabayashi. ‘the business of war’: Google employees protest
work for the Pentagon. The New York Times, 2018. URL: https://www.nytimes.com/
2018/04/04/technology/google-letter-ceo-pentagon-project.html.

70 Tamar Sharon. Blind-sided by privacy? digital contact tracing, the apple/google api and
big tech’s newfound role as global health policy makers. Ethics and Information Technology,
2020. doi:10.1007/s10676-020-09547-x.

72

71 Phil Simon. How nextdoor addressed racial profiling on its platform. Harvard Busi-
ness Review, 2018. URL: https://hbr.org/2018/05/how-nextdoor-addressed-racial-
profiling-on-its-platform.
Steffen Staab, Susan Halford, and Wendy Hall. Web Science in Europe: beyond boundaries.
Commun. ACM, 62(4):74, 2019. doi:10.1145/3312569.
Emma Strubell, Ananya Ganesh, and Andrew McCallum. Energy and Policy Considerations
for Deep Learning in NLP. arXiv e-prints, page arXiv:1906.02243, June 2019. arXiv:
1906.02243.

73

74 Mengfan Tang, Pranav Agrawal, and Ramesh Jain. Habits vs environment: What really
causes asthma? In Proceedings of the ACM Web Science Conference, pages 1–5, 2015.
75 The speakers commission on digital democracy:, 2015. URL: http://www.parliament.uk/
business/commons/the-speaker/speakers-commission-on-digital-democracy/.
76 Ramin Tinati, Susan Halford, Les Carr, and Catherine Pope. Big Data: methodological
challenges and approaches for sociological analysis. Sociology, 48(4):663–681, 2014.
77 Thanassis Tiropanis, Wendy Hall, Nigel Shadbolt, David De Roure, Noshir Contractor, and
Jim Hendler. The Web Science observatory. IEEE Intelligent Systems, 28(2):100–104, 2013.
Jon Truby. Decarbonizing bitcoin: Law and policy choices for reducing the energy consump-
tion of blockchain technologies and digital currencies. Energy Research & Social Science,
44:399–410, 2018. doi:10.1016/j.erss.2018.06.009.

78

79 Gert Jan van Hardeveld, Craig Webber, and Kieron O’Hara. Deviating from the cybercrim-
inal script: Exploring tools of anonymity (mis)used by carders on cryptomarkets. American
Behavioral Scientist, 61:1244–1266, October 2017.

80 Ricardo Vinuesa, Hossein Azizpour, Iolanda Leite, Madeline Balaam, Virginia Dignum,
Sami Domisch, Anna Felländer, Simone Daniela Langhans, Max Tegmark, and Francesco
Fuso Nerini. The role of Artificial Intelligence in achieving the Sustainable Development
Goals. Nature Communications, 11(1):233, 2020. doi:10.1038/s41467-019-14108-y.
Jennifer Welch, Susan Halford, and Mark Weal. Conceptualising the Web for post-conflict
governance building. Peacebuilding, 3(1):58–74, 2014.

81

