The web as a culture broth for agents and people to
grow knowledge
Jérôme Euzenat

To cite this version:

Jérôme Euzenat. The web as a culture broth for agents and people to grow knowledge. 2021 - Dagstuhl
seminar on Autonomous agents on the web, Feb 2021, Wadern, Germany. pp.40-41. ￿hal-03426549￿

HAL Id: hal-03426549

https://hal.science/hal-03426549

Submitted on 12 Nov 2021

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

The web as a culture broth for agents and
people to grow knowledge

Jérôme Euzenat

April 14, 2021

The worldwide web is, in particular, a fantastic medium through which peo-
ple and organisations share knowledge. This initial ambition of the web has not
faded, though the web is used for many other purposes and eﬀorts are deployed
to privatise part of it.

Agents on the web There are plenty of agents on the Web already, they
behave like tiny machines: as consumers, harvesting knowledge through crawl-
ing the web, as builders, developing the web through connecting and adding
knowledge, as repairers, ﬁnding dangling links, contradicting statements, and
ﬁxing then. These are some basic tasks by which such agents can contribute to
the web. And they do it, for instance as wikipedia bots.

As long as agents are autonomous, some of them will unweave what others
woven. This is also what people do. But the web will be more solid as agents
were to share a weaving culture. How can this be when they are autonomous?
Agents have to better communicate with each others. They can do this in various
ways: direct communication, cooperation or taking the web as a transportation
layer, but also as a medium. Thanks to the web, agents can be autonomous and
social, not autonomous and lonely.

Agents as knowledge producers Like yeast reﬁnes sugar into alcohol, agents
may reﬁne web data into knowledge and beliefs. They may perform such tasks
at a relatively basic level based on syntactic or statistical hints. They may do
it as well by developing a deeper understanding of the web content and the
knowledge that underlies it.

The semantic web eﬀort [1] was one step in this direction. The ability to
express formal knowledge, as ontologies, and to understand data through this
knowledge is a stepping stone on which agents could build. It has led to pro-
posals such as a data washing machine built on web knowledge itself [2].

Knowledge as culture Knowledge and beliefs are socially elaborated as part
of the culture of a society. Sharing knowledge is building cultures, diﬀerent
cultures. We should study how agents can elaborate knowledge socially and

1

culturally [3]. This falls into the topic of cultural evolution, in which evolution
theory is applied to such phenomena [4]. We should study how they can evolve
their knowledge throuh wandering, learning, building or repairing the web.

There may be many ways to study this: analysing how human societies do it,
developing logical theories of knowledge evolution, or experimenting with cul-
tural knowledge evolution. We are currently running a program [5, 6], building
on the work on cultural language evolution [7], to deepen our understanding of
how agents may evolve their knowledge.

But, like people, it would be nice that agents have a life beyond the web.

Agents and people Human beings are in the web like ﬁshes in the sea. The
web, as a mediation architecture, has been massively adopted, in various modal-
ities by humans beings. Yet, it is a fully artiﬁcial environment, so eventually
prone to be adopted by agents.

As discussed in previous sections, the building of a culture is only achieved
through interaction, either implicit or explicit, and adapting behaviour with
respect to interaction. Because the web could be an environment natural to
both agents and human beings, it is a perfect playground for studying further
cultural evolution in agents driven by human-compatibility [8]. Actually, it may
also be a good playground to study as well how human-compatible are some
human behaviour.

References

Tim Berners-Lee, James Hendler, Ora Lassila, The Semantic Web, Scientiﬁc
american 284(5):34–43, 2001.

Sören Auer, Jens Lehmann, Creating knowledge out of interlinked data, Seman-
tic web journal 1(1–2):97–104, 2010.

Jérôme Euzenat, A map without a legend: the semantic web and knowledge
evolution, Semantic web journal 11(1):63–68, 2020.

Alex Mesoudi, Alan White, Kevin Laland, Towards a uniﬁed science of cultural
evolution, Behavioral and brain sciences 29(4):329–383, 2006.

Jérôme Euzenat, Interaction-based ontology alignment repair with expansion
and relaxation, Proc. 26th International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelli-
gence (IJCAI), Melbourne (AU), pp185–191, 2017.

Yasser Bourahla, Manuel Atencia, Jérôme Euzenat, Knowledge improvement
and diversity under interaction-driven adaptation of learned ontologies, Proc.
20th International conference on autonomous agents and multiagent systems
(AAMAS), Online, 2021, to appear.

Luc Steels (ed.), Experiments in cultural language evolution, John Benjamins,
Amsterdam (NL), 2012.

Stuart Russell, Human compatible: artiﬁcial intelligence and the problem of
control, Viking New-York (NY US), 2019.

2

