Usability and User Experience are not Enough: Gaps to
Fill to Design for and Assess Well-Being and
Engagement
Célia Martinie, Philippe Palanque, Marco Winckler

To cite this version:

Célia Martinie, Philippe Palanque, Marco Winckler. Usability and User Experience are not Enough:
Gaps to Fill to Design for and Assess Well-Being and Engagement. VIII Iberoamerican Conference
on Human-Computer Interaction 2022, Oct 2022, La Havane, Cuba. pp.1-14. ￿hal-03811274￿

HAL Id: hal-03811274

https://inria.hal.science/hal-03811274

Submitted on 11 Oct 2022

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

Usability and User Experience are not Enough:  
Gaps to Fill to Design for and Assess Well-Being and 
Engagement 

Célia Martinie1[0000-0001-7907-3170], Philippe Palanque 1[0000-0002-5381-971X] and Marco 
Winckler2[0000-0002-0756-6934] 2 

1 ICS-IRIT, Université Toulouse III – Paul Sabatier, Toulouse, France 
2 SPARKS-wimmics team, I3S, Université Côte d’Azur, France  
martinie@irit.fr; palanque@irit.fr; winckler@inria.fr 

Abstract. Well-being is a complex phenomenon that is deeply depends on the 
individuals themselves and includes subjective perception of the past, present and 
future experiences. Connecting with work adds a concrete dimension to that well-
being that makes it possible to consider designing for well-being and assessing 
it.  One  key  element  related  to  well-being  is  engagement  at  work  and  gameful 
design is a mean to increase engagement. This position paper builds on the evo-
lution of the field of HCI over the years to identify means of addressing well-
being  through  engagement.  We  describe  the  concepts  related  to  Usability  and 
how they evolved towards User Experience to encompass more complex (related 
to self) elements. We show how previous work in the field has connected these 
two major properties (using tasks descriptions) and how it might be possible to 
extend further embracing human needs and motivation theory. A concrete exam-
ple is given in the context of interaction with a digital clock. Even though this 
example is simple, it conveys the concerns and highlights possible directions to-
wards solutions.  

Keywords: Task models, usability, user experience, motivation, human needs, 
work, operator. 

1 

Introduction 

The Human Factors community has been working on understanding the multiple inter-
nal states of operators (and more globally human beings) but also how to change this 
internal state to increase Subjective Well-Being (SBW) [3]. For instance, in [1], authors 
assess the connection between neurosis of adolescents and SWB. Foundations of hu-
man motivation and needs were made concrete with the seminal work of Maslow [10]. 
Even though its validity was (and still is) highly criticized in the literature [2] evidences 
are shown that self-actualization (the top-level need in the Maslow’s hierarchy) is not 
questioned. Concomitantly, Human-Computer Interaction community has been extend-
ing its research focus from Usability-centered design of services, systems and products 
to hedonic aspects covered by the User Experience property. Beyond, one contributing 

2 

factor to well-being is engagement that connects to the stimulation dimension of User 
Experience [14]. In this paper, we propose to use gameful design and automation as 
two design options to increase engagement of users/operators while performing their 
activities.  We  use  a  the  task  modelling  notation  HAMSTERS  [18]  to  describe  these 
activities and to assess their evolutions when automation and gameful design options 
are considered.  

The paper is structured as follows. Next section introduces the contributions of Us-
ability and User Experience on the design of interactive applications and interactions. 
This section also presents how task models can be used to represent usability and user 
experience related information. Section 3 extends section 2 by adding two additional 
concepts: hierarchy of needs and engagement. Section 4 introduces a simple illustrative 
example  to  show  how  targeting  engagement  (using  gameful  design  and  automation) 
can stimulate operators and reduce their workload. Section 5 concludes the paper and 
highlights potential directions for future work.  

2 

Usability and User Experience Contributions 

2.1  Usability 

HCI community historically focused on the usability of interactive systems, in order to 
ensure  that  operators  will  achieve  their  tasks  with  the  interactive  systems.  Usability 
standard (as defined in [9]) has deeply changed the design of interactive  systems by 
decomposing usability for ensuring careful consideration of three contributing factors. 
Assessing usability can be done in multiple manners and, as argued in [16], in some 
research contributions without careful consideration of the correlation between them. 

ese contributing factors are:  

•  Effectiveness: corresponds to the coverage of users tasks offered by the system func-
tions. It describes the capability of users to reach their goals with a given system.   
•  Efficiency: corresponds to the performance of users to reach their goals. It includes 

objective measurable elements such as number of errors or execution time.  

•  Satisfaction: corresponds to the users perceived satisfaction while performing their 

work with a given system. 

Fig. 1 represents the schematic view of the field of HCI in terms of users performing a 
task. The Human Processor model proposed in  [13] decomposes human activity into 
perceptive, cognitive and motor elementary tasks. This is close to the biological behav-
ior of humans and remains far away from human affects and needs that is presented in 
models in the following sections.  

3 

Fig. 1. The operator at work as depicted in the Human-Processor Model [13].  

2.2  User Experience (UX) 

User Experience property has been addressed more recently with methods supporting 
the design for User Experience [7] and with methods for the assessment of User Expe-
rience [6].   

Fig. 2. The six contributing factors of User Experience as proposed in [6].  

Various definitions have been proposed for User Experience including affects and 
emotions, aesthetics or values [7]. According to the work of [14] User Experience can 
be decomposed in:  

•  Aesthetics: The aesthetic level involves a product’s capacity to delight one or more 

of our sensory modalities; 

•  Emotion: The emotional level involves those experiences that are typically consid-

ered in emotion psychology and in everyday language about emotions; 

 
 
4 

•  Identification:  a  hedonic  attribute  group,  which  captures  the  product's  ability  to 

communicate important personal values to relevant others; 

•  Stimulation: The stimulation dimension describes to what extent a product can sup-
port the human need for innovative and interesting functions, interactions and con-
tents 

•  Meaning and Value: The meaning level involves our ability to assign personality 
or  other  expressive  characteristics  and  to  assess  the  personal  or  symbolic  signifi-
cance of products; 

•  Social-connectedness: The social connectedness involves means to increase social 

pleasure offering means to interact and share information with others.  

User experience goes beyond Usability and gets closer to feelings and emotions that 
are contributing to human motivation and human needs which are in return impacting 
well-being.  

Fig. 3. Representation of user study result related to user experience in the task model indicat-
ing variations in the UX dimensions using color panels and representing frequencies of choice 
(%) on the connecting arrows to support usability analysis  

2.3  Connecting Usability and UX Through Task Models  

Operator work can be easily described using task models which decompose work in a 
set of goals each of them being refined by a set of tasks to reach the goal.  
HAMSTERS [18] is a tool-supported graphical task modeling notation for represent-
ing human activities and work in a hierarchical and ordered manner. At the higher ab-
straction level, goals can be decomposed into sub-goals, which can in turn be decom-
posed into activities. The output of this decomposition is a graphical tree of nodes. 
Nodes can be tasks or temporal operators. Tasks can be of several types (see Figure 3) 
and contain information such as a name, information details, and criticality level. 

 
5 

Only the single user high-level task types are presented here but HAMSTERS has a 
variety of further task types available and accounts for information, objects and 
knowledge involved in the performance of the work [19].  
In [6], Bernhaupt et al. have proposed the integration of User Experience contributing 
factors including both hedonic and pragmatic qualities inside task models (addressing 
mainly the effectiveness factor of Usability).  

The objective of that research work was to connect User Experience to the activity 
of operators in their daily work (in that case media consumption using a remote-control 
unit (RCU)). 

3 

Beyond Usability and UX  

This section presents two additional conceptual frameworks: the pyramid of needs from 
Maslow and Gameful design for Engagement. These frameworks go beyond classical 
Usability and even the more recent concept underlying User Experience.  

3.1  Motivation and Needs  

The work of Maslow on the hierarchy of human needs was early introduced in [10] and 
refined in [11]  which  revisits the concepts introduced by Maslow  which are  decom-
posed in three core concepts:  

•  Basic needs: they encompass physiological and safety needs that correspond to the 
immediate and short-term survival of the individual. They ensure the sustainability 
of the biological machinery that compose human beings.  

•  Psychological needs: encompass relationship to others i.e. social aspects of human 
being as well as relationship with self, including prestige and subjective perception 
of accomplishment.  

•  Self-fulfillment needs: correspond to the definition of self-actualization aiming at 

deploying the full potential of the individual.  

Fig. 4. The hierarchy of needs and motivation from [29] original work in [10] 

 
6 

Work is a transverse concept with respect to the hierarchy of needs presented in Fig. 4. 
Indeed, for each of the levels of the pyramid, work is: 

•  Physiological needs: e.g. work can contribute to provide food directly (farming) or 

indirectly (money); 

•  Safety  needs:  e.g.  building  fences  or  constructing  protections  may  contribute  to 

safety and security;  

•  Belongingness and love needs: e.g. earning resources via work might allow build-

ing a family; 

•  Esteem needs: e.g. building a career in a company might contribute to esteem via 

success;  

•  Self-actualization need: e.g. evolution in the work environment during the entire 
life might support the construction of the personality to become self-actualized.  

3.2  Gameful design and Engagement 

Although  gameful  design  and  gamification  techniques  have  not  been  studied  evenly 
across application domains (most of the contributions come from the application do-
mains of education and health), Seaborn and Fels [21] surveyed the literature and es-
tablished that the results of gamification are mostly positive. They highlight that game-
ful design, including gamification, raise engagement and user performance. Indeed, a 
study on the gamification of the tutorial of the AutoCAD 3D objects modelling appli-
cation [22] reported higher subjective engagement levels with the gamified application, 
and that users performed a set of testing tasks from 20% to 76% faster after using the 
tutorial with the gamified components. Gameful design can also encourage participa-
tion and collaboration with other users as demonstrated in the context of online learning 
[23]. These examples (and many other ones) show that the range of potential benefits 
of gameful design is quite wide if design choices are carefully elicited.  

Gameful design requires fine-tuning of the game mechanics that are integrated in the 
interactive system, and game elements have to match what the user is able to perform 
in the context of use. Wilson et al. [23] argue that some design choices may be coun-
terproductive and that engagement and motivation may vary a lot depending on the type 
of game element. Adding artificial challenge to a system supporting functional needs 
engenders frustration [24]. Moreover, Korn et al [25] showed that in an industrial en-
vironment, some gamification elements may improve production speed but may also 
increase the error rate. 

As stated above, adding game elements and challenges to motivate the user leads to 
add additional objectives and tasks to perform with the interactive system. These addi-
tional tasks interleave with work tasks, and have thus to integrate in a consistent manner 
with them in order to avoid frustration and errors (especially capture and interference 
ones). Moreover, the design of game elements also requires identifying automation op-
portunities (for these game elements), with the objective of increasing the overall usa-
bility of the system but also to make sure that proposed challenges are important and 
motivating experiences for the user [24]. 

7 

Gameful design for interactive systems at work thus requires being able to describes 

exhaustively and systematically: 

•  User work tasks; 
•  User tasks while interacting with work automation;  
•  User tasks to reach game elements objectives;  

Analyzing all these elements together is also critical in order to detect conflicting 

elements. 

4 

Illustrative example: The Mackworth clock 

4.1 

Introduction to the example  

The  Mackworth  clock  is  an  interactive  system  designed  and  developed  to  study  the 
performance of operators monitoring information on airborne radars [26]. The system 
was  developed  to  build  experiments  to  assess  vigilance  capabilities  of  human  being 
while monitoring autonomous systems. The Mackworth autonomous system (presented 
in Fig. 5 a)) includes a green point, which moves in steps every second (like the second 
hand of a clock). In the experiment, at irregular time intervals, the green point moves 
the double of the usual distance (jumps one step). The operator has to detect this unex-
pected movement (representing a problem or a failure) and to press a button to prove 
that the malfunction has been detected. 

a) 

  b) 

Fig. 5. a) original Mackworth Clock [26] and b) modified Mackworth Clock from [27]. 

Fig. 5 b) presents a modified and digitalized version of the Mackworth clock. We chose 
to  present  it  because  it  makes  more  explicit  (as  a  symbolic  representation)  how  the 
Mackworth autonomous system was functioning. 

The  hypothesis  behind  this  experiment  was  that  human  performance  in  detecting 
malfunctions would decrease over time. Indeed, the study of performance of operators 
monitoring this autonomous system confirmed the fact that attention and vigilance de-
crease over time. The main outcome of this study was to propose identify the best com-
promise between the duration of the monitoring period (the watch-time of the operator) 
and the errors. In the following sections, we discuss the opportunity to alter this exper-
iment adding game elements to the monitoring task to assess the possible increase of 
attention and vigilance for longer monitoring tasks.  

 
8 

Fig. 6. Task model describing the tasks to “Monitor clock” 

Fig. 6 presents the detailed description of the tasks the operator has to perform to 
monitor the clock. The main goal, represented at the top of the task model, is “Monitor 
clock”. Under this main goal, the temporal ordering operator “|||” named concurrency 
has two branches that describe the tasks performing in parallel. On the left branch under 
the main goal, the system updates the clock every second (abstract system task “Update 
numeric watch” with an incoming arrow from the calendar event “Every second”). This 
task decomposes in a sequence (temporal ordering operator “>>”) of a system task (a 
choice, indicated  with the choice  temporal ordering operator “[]”, between  the tasks 
“Update to next” and “Update (malfunction)”) and the interactive output task “Display 
green point” which uses the output device “screen”. The system tasks update the value 
of the software object “position of green point”, which is required to perform the system 
output task “Display green point”. In the right branch under the main goal “Monitor 
clock”, the abstract iterative task “Monitor green point” decomposes in a sequence of 
user tasks. First, the user performs the perceptive task “Look at green point” using the 
output  device  “screen”,  which  produces  the  information  “current  position  of  green 
point’. Then the  user performs the cognitive task “Recall previous position of green 
point” using the information “Memorized position of green point” and producing the 
information “previous position of green point”. Then the user performs the cognitive 
analysis task “Compare previous and current position” using both information “current 
position of green point” and “previous position of green point”. This task produces the 
information “size of shift”. Then, the user performs the cognitive analysis task “Ana-
lyze if shift is standard or not” using the information “size of shift” and the declarative 
knowledge “Standard shift is +1”. Then from the result of this analysis task, the user 
makes a choice (described using the choice temporal ordering operator “[]” combined 
with the test arcs on the value of the information “shift type”). If the shift type is stand-
ard, the user decides not to do anything. If the shift type is different from standard, then 
the user decides to press the response key, and then presses the response key. At last, 

 
9 

the user performs the cognitive task  “Memorize  position of green point”  which pro-
duces the information “Memorized position of green point”. 

4.2  Automation as a design option to reduce workload  

The main goal of the user task is to monitor the clock and the challenge of being 
attentive  and  staring  at  the  clock  should  remain  (as  migrating  it  to  automation  raise 
similar  challenges  such  as  monitoring  automation  instead  of  monitoring  the  clock  – 
which is already an automation). However, other tasks such as “Recall previous posi-
tion of green point” and “Memorize position of green point” may be difficult and error-
prone and are articulatory with respect to the monitoring of the handle of the clock. For 
these reasons, we propose to migrate those tasks from the operator to the system. The 
automation of these work tasks decreases the number of tasks to perform for the oper-
ator. Fig. 7 presents a screenshot of a new interface to present the information of these 
migrated tasks to the operator.  

Fig. 7. Illustration of the design proposal for automating operator’s work 

Fig. 8 presents the task model modified for this automation proposal. In the left main 
branch of the model, we added two system tasks: an output system task named “display 
previous position of green point”, as well as a storing system task. We also added a new 
software object “stored position of green point” to describe that the system will be stor-
ing the value of the previous position instead of the user doing it. In the abstract iterative 
task “Monitor green point”, we replaced the cognitive task “recall previous position of 
green point” with the perceptive task “Look at previous position of green point”, and 
removed the cognitive task “Memorize position of green point”, as well as the associ-
ated memorized information “Memorized position of green point”. 

 
10 

Fig. 8. Task model modified for the work automation 

This proposal of work automation should decrease cognitive load but may lead operator 
to be less attentive. We thus propose to integrate a game element, focused on a contin-
uous input from the operator, to increase immersion. The game element the continuous 
tracking of the green point using a mouse pointer. The operator has one hand on the 
mouse device and has to move the mouse pointer to the green point each time the green 
point shifts. Figure 6 presents three screenshots that illustrate this design proposal. At 
the bottom of the screens, a panel indicates the total time on the green point and the 
total time outside of the green point. 

Fig. 9. Illustration of the game element added to the modified Mackworth Clock 

Fig.  10 presents the task  model modified to include the tasks related to the game 
element “mouse pointer tracking using a mouse device”, as well as the automation of 
work (explained previously). In the left main branch, we added the system output task 

 
 
11 

“Display mouse pointer” which requires the software object “Mouse pointer position”. 
In the  right part of the model, we  added a new branch  which  main task is  “Monitor 
mouse pointer” and is iterative. This task interleaves with the two other sub-goals “Up-
date numeric watch” and “Monitor green point”. It decomposes using the same pattern 
as the green point monitoring task, but for the mouse pointer. The user first performs 
the perceptive task “Look at mouse pointer”, which produces the information “mouse 
pointer position”. The user then performs the cognitive analysis task “Compare mouse 
pointer position with green point position”, using both the information “current position 
of  green  point”  and  “mouse  pointer  position”.  This  task  produces  the  information 
“mouse pointer position relative to green point”. Depending on the value of this infor-
mation, mouse pointer is on green point or mouse pointer is not on green point, either 
the user will perform the cognitive decision task “Decide not to do anything” or the 
cognitive decision task “Decide to move the mouse pointer” followed by the interactive 
input task “Move mouse pointer”. 

Fig. 10. Task model modified to integrate both automation and game element  

This task model helps to figure out the impact of the game element on the operator’s 
tasks. We see that the new set of tasks that we introduced represents as many tasks as 
the set of tasks to monitor the green point and that this set of tasks interleaves with the 
work task, and share a common information to process for the tasks (Information “cur-
rent position of green point” at the bottom in Fig. 10). This confirms that the design 
proposal should increase the operator’s workload while helping the operator to focus 
on the main goal. 

By supporting the precise comparison of the original work tasks with the tasks al-
tered by adding work automation and game elements, we argue that a task models based 
approach enables to identify relevant automation and gamification opportunities. The 
level of precision of task descriptions enables to filter out tasks that should be migrated 
to the system and tasks for  which  gamification  will benefit to user performance and 

 
12 

engagement. In that way, it supports reaching an optimum level of workload as exem-
plified in Fig. 11. 

Mackworth clock 

Mackworth clock+game element 

Fig. 11. Using Yerkes-Dodson [28] curve as a mean to represent evolution of user engagement 
and performance when integration game elements are added to work tasks. 

5 

Conclusions and Perspectives 

This paper has presented the potential benefits of using game elements interleaved with 
operators’ work in order to increase user experience and engagement of operators. We 
argue that describing how these game elements transform the operators’ work is critical 
in order to be able to assess the impact (positive and negative) of the activities added 
by the game elements on operators’ work.  
We have revisited the Mackworth clock experiment which is centered on the monitor-
ing (by an operator) of an autonomous system. We took the position that degradation 
of the monitoring performance of the operators was related to a loss of engagement, 
and an increase of boredom and was due to the lack of active participation of the oper-
ator on the system.  
To  improve  performance,  we  decided  to  integrate  in  the  work  tasks  additional  tasks 
related to game elements added to the system. We used the HAMSTERS|XL notation 
to describe the original and the altered task models and used these models to demon-
strate the higher engagement of operators when game elements are added. 
Future work will consolidate these research results demonstrated on a very simple case 
study by applying them to more complex environments such as safety critical control 
rooms where engagement is critical to ensure that operators are constantly monitoring 
the evolutions of the system and able to react promptly in case of failures.  

 
 
13 

References 

1.  Winzer, R., Vaez, M., Lindberg, L. et al. Exploring associations between subjective well-
being and personality over a time span of 15–18 months: a cohort study of adolescents in 
Sweden. BMC Psychol 9, 173 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1186/s40359-021-00673-9 

2.  Wahba, M. A., & Bridwell, L. G. (1976). Maslow reconsidered: A review of research on the 
need hierarchy theory. Organizational behavior and human performance, 15(2), 212-240. 
3.  Tay, L., & Diener, E. (2011). Needs and subjective well-being around the world. Journal of 

Personality and Social Psychology, 101(2), 354-356. 

4.  Baldauf M., Peter Fröhlich, Shadan Sadeghian, Philippe Palanque, Virpi Roto, Wendy Ju, 
Lynne Baillie, and Manfred Tscheligi. 2021. Automation Experience at the Workplace. Ex-
tended Abstracts of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 
ACM, Article 89, 1–6. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/3411763.3441332 . 

5.  Fröhlich P., Matthias Baldauf, Philippe Palanque, Virpi Roto, Thomas Meneweger, Manfred 
Tscheligi,  Zoe  M.  Becerra,  and Fabio Paternò.  2020.  Automation  Experience  across  Do-
mains:  Designing  for  Intelligibility,  Interventions,  Interplay  and  Integrity.  Extended  Ab-
stracts of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA '20). 
ACM, 1–8. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/3334480.3375178 

6.  Bernhaupt, R., Martinie, C., Palanque, P., Wallner, G. (2020). A Generic Visualization Ap-
proach Supporting Task-Based Evaluation of Usability and User Experience. Human-Cen-
tered  Software  Engineering.  HCSE  2020.  LNCS,  vol  12481.  Springer,  Cham. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-64266-2_2 

7.  Lai-Chong Law E., Paul van Schaik, Virpi Roto, Attitudes towards user experience (UX) 
measurement, International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, Volume 72, Issue 6, 2014, 
Pages 526-541, ISSN 1071-5819, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhcs.2013.09.006. 

8.  Kaye J., Elizabeth Buie, Jettie Hoonhout, Kristina Höök, Virpi Roto, Scott Jenson, and Peter 
Wright. 2011. Designing for user experience: academia & industry. CHI '11 Extended Ab-
stracts  on  Human  Factors  in  Computing  Systems  (CHI  EA  '11).  ACM,  219–222. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/1979742.1979486 

9.  ISO 9241-210 2008. Ergonomics of human system interaction-Part 210: Human-centred de-
sign for interactive systems. Standard. International Organization for Standardization, Ge-
neva, CH. 

10.  Maslow, A. H. (1943). A theory of human motivation. Psychological Review, 50(4), 370-

96. 

11.  Maslow, A. H. (1987). Motivation and personality (3rd ed.). Delhi, India: Pearson Educa-

tion. 

12.  Kenrick, D. T., Neuberg, S. L., Griskevicius, V., Becker, D. V., & Schaller, M. (2010). Goal-
driven cognition and functional behavior: The fundamental-motives framework. Current Di-
rections in Psychological Science, 19(1), 63-67. 

13.  Card,  S.K;  Moran,  T.  P;  and  Newell,  A.  The  Model  Human  Processor:  An  Engineering 
Model of Human Performance. In K. R. Boff, L. Kaufman, & J. P. Thomas (Eds.), Handbook 
of Perception and Human Performance. Vol. 2: Cognitive Processes and Performance, 1986, 
pages 1–35. 

14.  Pirker M.  and  Bernhaupt  R.  2011. Measuring user  experience  in the  living room:  results 
from an ethnographically oriented field study indicating major evaluation factors. In Pro-
ceedings of the 9th European Conference on Interactive TV and Video (EuroITV '11). ACM, 
79–82. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2000119.2000133 

15.  Desmet, P. M. A., & Hekkert, P. (2007). Framework of Product Experience. International 

Journal of Design, 1(1), 13-23 

14 

16.  Frøkjær E., Morten Hertzum, and Kasper Hornbæk. 2000. Measuring usability: are effec-
tiveness, efficiency, and satisfaction really correlated? In Proceedings of the SIGCHI con-
ference  on  Human  Factors  in  Computing  Systems  (CHI 
'00).  ACM,  345–352. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/332040.332455 

17.  The School of life. Retrieved April 6th 2022. https://www.theschooloflife.com/article/the-

importance-of-maslows-pyramid-of-needs/  

18.  Martinie C., Philippe Palanque, Elodie Bouzekri, Andy Cockburn, Alexandre Canny, and 
Eric Barboni. 2019. Analysing and Demonstrating Tool-Supported Customizable Task No-
tations.  Proc.  ACM  Hum.-Comput.  Interact.  3,  EICS,  Article  12  (June  2019),  26  pages. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/3331154 

19.  Martinie C., Philippe Palanque, Martina Ragosta, and Racim Fahssi. 2013. Extending pro-
cedural  task  models  by  systematic  explicit  integration  of  objects,  knowledge  and  infor-
mation.  Proceedings  of  the  31st  European  Conference  on  Cognitive  Ergonomics  (ECCE 
'13). ACM, New York, NY, USA, Article 23, 10 pages.  

20.  Roto V., P. Palanque, H. Karvonen. Engaging Automation at Work – A Literature Review, 
in:  Proceedings  of  Human  Work  Interaction  Design.  Designing  Engaging  Automation. 
HWID  2018.  IFIP  Advances  in  Information  and  Communication  Technology,  vol  544. 
Springer, Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-05297-3_11 

21.  Seaborn K, Fels D. L. “Gamification in theory and action: A survey”, International Journal 
of  Human-Computer  Studies,  Volume  74,  2015,  Pages  14-31,  ISSN  1071-5819, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhcs.2014.09.006. 

22.  Li W., T. Grossman, G. Fitzmaurice. GamiCAD: a gamified tutorial system for first time 
autocad users, in: Proceedings of the 25th annual ACM symposium on User interface soft-
ware and technology (UIST '12). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 103-112. 

23.  Wilson D., C. Calongne, S. Henderson. “Gamification challenges and a case study in online 

learning Internet Learning”, 4 (2) (2016) Article 8. 

24.  Deterding S. “The Lens of Intrinsic Skill Atoms: A Method for Gameful Design”, Human–

Computer Interaction, 30,3-4, (2015), 294-335. 

25.  Korn O., M. Funk, A. Schmidt. Towards a gamification of industrial production: a compar-
ative study in sheltered work environments, in: Proceedings of the 7th ACM SIGCHI Sym-
posium on Engineering Interactive Computing Systems (EICS '15). Association for Compu-
ting Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 84–93.  

26.  Mackworth N. H. “The breakdown of vigilance during prolonged visual search”, Q. J. Exp. 

Psychol. 1 6–21, 1948. 

27.  Martel A., S. Dähne, B. Blankertz. “EEG predictors of covert vigilant attention”. J Neural 

Eng. 2014 Jun; 11(3):035009. Epub 2014 May 19. PMID: 24835495. 

28.  Yerkes R.M., Dodson J. D. "The relation of strength of stimulus to rapidity of habit-for-

mation". Journal of Comparative Neurology and Psychology 18: 459–482 (1908). 

29.  The School of life. Retrieved April 6th 2022. https://www.theschooloflife.com/article/the-

importance-of-maslows-pyramid-of-needs/  

30.   

