Root phenotyping: important and minimum information
required for root modeling in crop plants
Hirokazu Takahashi, Christophe Pradal

To cite this version:

Hirokazu Takahashi, Christophe Pradal. Root phenotyping:
required for root modeling in crop plants. Breeding Science, 2021, 71 (1), pp.109-116.
bbs.20126￿. ￿hal-03139460￿

important and minimum information
￿10.1270/js-

HAL Id: hal-03139460

https://inria.hal.science/hal-03139460

Submitted on 12 Feb 2021

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

Breeding Science Preview
doi: 10.1270/jsbbs.20126

Invited Review

This article is an Advance Online Publication of the authors’ corrected proof.
Note that minor changes may be made before final version publication.

Root phenotyping: important and minimum information required for root
modeling in crop plants

Hirokazu Takahashi*†1) and Christophe Pradal†2,3)

1) Graduate School of Bioagricultural Sciences, Nagoya University, Furo-cho, Chikusa, Nagoya, Aichi 464-8601, Japan
2) UMR AGAP, CIRAD, F-34398 Montpellier, France
3) Inria & LIRMM, University of Montpellier, CNRS, Montpellier, France

As  plants  cannot  relocate,  they  require  effective  root  systems  for  water  and  nutrient  uptake.  Root  develop‐
ment plasticity enables plants to adapt to different environmental conditions. Research on improvements in
crop root systems is limited in comparison with that in shoots as the former are difficult to image. Breeding
more effective root systems is proposed as the “second green revolution”. There are several recent publica‐
tions on root system architecture (RSA), but the methods used to analyze the RSA have not been standard‐
ized. Here, we introduce traditional and current root-imaging methods and discuss root structure phenotyping.
Some important root structures have not been standardized as roots are easily affected by rhizosphere condi‐
tions  and  exhibit  greater  plasticity  than  shoots;  moreover,  root  morphology  significantly  varies  even  in  the
same genotype. For these reasons, it is difficult to define the ideal root systems for breeding. In this review,
we introduce several types of software to analyze roots and identify important root parameters by modeling to
simplify the root system characterization. These parameters can be extracted from photographs captured in
the field. This modeling approach is applicable to various legacy root data stored in old or unpublished for‐
mats. Standardization of RSA data could help estimate root ideotypes.

Key Words: legacy data, root imaging, root modeling, root phenotyping, root system architecture.

Introduction

Plant structure considerably varies under different growing
conditions  even  when  the  plants  have  the  same  genotype.
Plant architecture is strongly affected by environmental fac‐
tors  such  as  temperature  and  light  intensity  (Tardieu  et  al.
2017).  Hence,  plant  phenomic  studies  are  more  difficult
than animal phenomic studies. To increase crop yield, shoot
traits  such  as  plant  height,  flowering  time,  and  tiller  and
flower  number  have  been  improved  through  breeding
(Horton 2000, Mathan et al. 2016). In contrast, plant roots
have received relatively limited attention despite the impor‐
tance  of  the  root  system  for  water  and  nutrient  uptake  by
plants.  The  first  green  revolution  was  based  on  growing
crops  in  soil  and  applying  chemical  fertilizer  at  high  rates
(Tilman 1998). The second green revolution could be based
on crop tolerance to low soil fertility because drought and
low soil fertility are the primary causes of low crop yield in
developing  countries  (Lynch  2007).  As  plant  roots  widely

Communicated by Yusaku Uga
Received September 11, 2020. Accepted December 8, 2020.
First Published Online in J-STAGE on February 10, 2021.
*Corresponding author (e-mail: hiro_t@agr.nagoya-u.ac.jp)
† These authors contributed equally to this work

penetrate  the  soil  and  are  vital  for  nutrient  acquisition,
improvements  in  root  architecture  could  contribute  to  the
second  green  revolution.  Root  system  architecture  (RSA)
consists  of  the  shape  and  spatial  arrangement  of  root  sys‐
tems within the soil. It is determined by plant genetics and
soil environment characteristics such as water and nutrient
availability and rhizosphere size (Rogers and Benfey 2015).
Elucidating the RSA could help to understand how plants
adapt under changing environments and to improve agricul‐
tural productivity. However, there are challenges in evaluat‐
ing  plant  root  systems.  First,  the  root  system  cannot  be
assessed  without  destroying  or  losing  at  least  a  part  of  it.
Second, the ideal root systems for optimal crop growth are
unknown as they vary with environmental conditions. Sev‐
eral  approaches  have  been  used  for  phenotyping  root  sys‐
tems  and  various  methods  including  both  nondestructive
and  effective  methods  have  been  reported  (Atkinson  et  al.
2019, Guimarães et al. 2020, McGrail et al. 2020, Tardieu
et al. 2017).

In  this  review,  we  introduce  conventional  and  current
methods  used  for  root  phenotyping.  Data  on  RSA  have
accumulated owing to the progress in root phenotyping and
analytical software development. However, RSA comprises
several root traits that are easily influenced by the changes
in environmental conditions. Here, we discuss the minimum

1

BS Breeding Science

Preview

root  trait  information  required  to  explain  the  RSA  effec‐
tively. To this end, we reconstructed the RSA by root mod‐
eling.  Recently, 
root  phenotyping  pipelines  were
established (Atkinson et al. 2019, Paez-Garcia et al. 2015,
Tardieu  et  al.  2017)  and  several  root  models  were  con‐
structed  (Barczi  et  al.  2018,  Postma  et  al.  2017,  Schnepf
et  al.  2018).  However,  scientists  may  nonetheless  retain
legacy  root  data  in  old  or  unpublished  formats.  The  mini‐
mum  information  presented  in  this  review  could  render
such data accessible and clarify personal researcher data.

Root system architecture (RSA) phenotyping

root  assessments  are 

Root  phenotyping  pipelines  consist  of  root  imaging  and
root  trait  digitization.  In  this  review,  we  focus  exclusively
on root system visualization. Several root imaging methods
have been reported but there is no standard methodology as
its  advantages  and  disadvantages
each  method  has 
(McGrail  et  al.  2020).  Before  starting  RSA  studies,  it  is
necessary  to  establish  whether  the  plants  are  grown  under
field or controlled conditions. Under field conditions, shoot
phenotyping  in  high-throughput  platforms  and  in  field-
based experiments has improved via advanced remote sens‐
ing technologies involving drones and sensors (Chen et al.
2019,  Liu  et  al.  2019,  Tardieu  et  al.  2017).  In  high-
less
throughput  phenotyping, 
advanced than shoot assessments as it is difficult to visual‐
ize  underground  field  areas.  Weaver  et  al.  (1922)  used
trenches to expose the RSA under field conditions. The root
images  were  detailed  but  some  trenches  were  ≥2 m  deep
and  the  roots  had  to  be  manually  excavated.  Since  then,
trenching methods have improved, but root image acquisi‐
tion is nonetheless time-consuming and trenches are unsuit‐
able for large-scale experiments. To minimize the time for
root  measurements,  a  convolutional  neural  network  was
applied  for  the  root  segmentation  in  trench  profile  images
(Teramoto and Uga 2020). The predictions of roots using a
trained model showed a high correlation with the manually
traced results. The application of a deep neural network to
root  segmentation  will  improve  root  image  acquisition  in
other  fields  experiments  (Teramoto  and  Uga  2020).  Soil
core  sampling 
is  another  classical  root  phenotyping
method.  Soil  cores  of  length  1–2 m  are  collected  using
cylinders several centimeters in diameter. The soil cores are
then rinsed, the roots are collected and their distribution is
estimated  (Kücke  et  al.  1995).  Soil  cores  have  also  been
subjected  to  fluorescence  imaging  to  obtain  high-contrast
root images and improve throughput for root segment visu‐
alization and measurements (Wasson et al. 2016). However,
soil cores furnish limited root system data as they provide
only partial root images and cannot estimate the whole root
system.  Moreover,  as  the  roots  are  segmented  when  they
are collected, it is difficult to distinguish between the roots
of target plants and those of the neighboring plants. Mono‐
lith methods are also traditionally used for root samplings.
The monolith methods involve driving large boxes or cylin‐

Takahashi and Pradal

ders with bottom side open into the ground (Teramoto et al.
2020, Wu and Guo 2014). The insertion of monoliths into
the soils is difficult because of the hardness of soil, some‐
times  necessitating 
the  use  of  hammer  or  backhoe
(Teramoto  et  al.  2020,  Wu  and  Guo  2014).  The  size  of  a
monolith is larger than that of a cylinder in soil core sam‐
pling; a cylinder of diameter 50 cm was used for maize root
sampling  (Wu  and  Guo  2014).  Minirhizotrons  have  been
used in nondestructive root phenotyping in the field. Plexi‐
glas,  cellulose  acetate  butyrate  (CAB),  polycarbonate
(lexan),  acrylic,  and  glass  minirhizotron  tubes  are  inserted
into the soil before planting. Color micro-video cameras are
inserted  into  the  tubes  to  capture  images  of  the  roots  in
direct  contact  with  the  tubes  (Johnson  et  al.  2001).  The
images  provide  information  about  the  roots  and  surround‐
ing  environment  including  the  soil  and  microorganisms.
Nevertheless,  the  captured  images  only  show  parts  of  the
root systems, and they do not reflect them in their entirety.
Another potential nondestructive root phenotyping method
is ground-penetrating radar. However, considering the reso‐
lution,  its  application  would  be  limited  to  trees  and  other
woody  plants  (Populus × canadensis,  Pinus  pinaster  Ait.
and P. pinea L.; Zenone et al. 2008).

Shovelomics  has  been  used  to  phenotype  maize  crown
and brace roots (Trachsel et al. 2011). Root number, angle,
and  branching  pattern  have  been  assessed  using  recombi‐
nant  inbred  lines  (RILs;  Trachsel  et  al.  2011).  However,
there is no clear definition for shovelomics and it is uncer‐
tain whether it can be applied to other crops besides maize.
Here, we define shovelomics as a method of simply digging
out soil with a shovel and performing high-throughput RSA
phenotyping  in  the  field.  Shovelomics  could  be  applied  to
large-scale  experiments,  and  it  is  widely  use  in  the  RSA
analysis  of  several  crops  (e.g.,  rapeseed/canola,  common
bean,  and  cowpea).  However,  it  only  allows  partial  RSA
assessment as deep roots and thin, soft lateral roots are eas‐
ily  missed  during  digging.  One  possible  strategy  for  mini‐
mizing  these  losses  and  obtaining  clear  RSA  images  is  to
consider  the  type  of  soil  used  for  cultivation.  For  this
review, we used a field in the Arid Land Research Center of
Tottori  University  (Fig. 1A,  1B).  The  soil  therein  is  adja‐
cent to the Tottori sand dune and consists almost entirely of
sand  with  only  small  proportions  of  silt  and  clay  (Kimura
et al. 2004). Sandy soils with a low clay content have a low
water  holding  capacity,  and  their  water  content  declines
more  rapidly  than  that  of  high  clay  soils  (Yu  et  al.  2017).
Although  sand  dune  soil  water  content  quickly  decreases,
irrigation  readily  restores  and  maintains  soil  moisture.
Moreover, it is easy to excavate roots from this type of soil
(Fig. 1C). It is also easy to rinse arenaceous soil from roots
and minimize root loss (Fig. 1C, 1D). The RSA of soybean
(Glycine  max)  grown  in  a  sand  dune  field  did  not  match
that  of  soybean  grown  hydroponically  (Fig. 1E).  Plant
growth  is  easily  influenced  by  short-term  environmental
stimuli  that  may  alter  morphology,  organ  and  tissue  struc‐
ture,  or  both.  Microscale  soil  water  content  patterns  (Bao

2

Root phenotyping and modeling in crop plants

Breeding Science
Preview

BS

Fig. 1. Large-scale sand dune field experiment. The experimental field consisted mainly of sand, and therefore, its water content was easy to
control. (A) Separation of field into irrigated (control) and drought conditions. (B) Soybean (Glycine max) seedlings grown in sand dune field.
(C) Root sampling in the field of ALRC. Digging tool like a cylinder-monolith was inserted into the soil, and then the root system was collected.
The tool can be easily inserted into the sand dune fields. Root loss was minimized because the sand was easily removed from the roots. Only a
few minutes are required for root sampling from one plant. High-throughput root sampling like “shovelomics” is possible in the field of ALRC.
(D) Rinsed root system image captured using a 2D scanner. (E) Correlation between the total root lengths under hydroponic and sand dune field
conditions.

et  al.  2014)  and  soil  compaction  (Correa et  al.  2019)  may
affect the RSA. The heterogeneity in soil water content and
soil  compaction  in  sand  dune  fields  influence  root  growth
and,  by  extension,  explain  the  observed  differences  in  the
RSA  between  plants  grown  in  sand  dune  fields  and  those
raised hydroponically.

Root  growth  and  growth  period  are  limited  under  con‐
trolled conditions such as the use of vessels or pots for cul‐
tivation  compared  with  those  under  field  experiments.
Rhizosphere  size  is  also  restricted  under  controlled  condi‐
tions but clear root images may nonetheless be obtained by
minimizing root loss. The root box-pin board method con‐
strains the rhizosphere, but it is not suitable for sequential
observations  as  the  root  box  is  several  centimeters  thick
and the soil is completely rinsed off during root sampling.
However, the whole root system may be obtained using this
method  because  root  loss  and  destruction  are  minimized
(Fig. 2; Kono et al. 1987). The rhizotron is a nondestructive
2D  root  imaging  method,  but  it  also  restricts  the  rhizo‐
sphere size. When soil is used for cultivation, the soil com‐

pounds  interfere  with  image  capture  and  prevent  the
acquisition  of  whole-root  system  images.  The  GLO-Roots
system  overcomes  this  problem  using  the  Arabidopsis
thaliana-transformed  luminescence  reporter  gene  (Rellán-
Álvarez  et  al.  2015).  Hydroponic,  agar  plate,  and  semi-
hydroponic systems have been used for nondestructive root
imaging and time-sensitive observations (Chen et al. 2020,
Jeudy  et  al.  2016).  Under  these  systems,  the  underground
and  sometimes  the  aboveground  parts  are  relatively  uni‐
form. Hence, we can obtain highly reproducible data com‐
pared with those generated from soil and field experiments.
However, the RSA under these conditions may differ from
those for roots grown under controlled soil conditions (Ma
et al. 2019). Hydrogel-based transparent soil may be useful
for  root  phenotyping  (Ma  et  al.  2019).  This  cost-effective
system  requires  no  specific  nondestructive  3D  imaging
devices. The RSA of plants grown under hydrogel systems
more  closely  resembles  that  of  plants  grown  in  soil  than
those for plants raised hydroponically. Thus, the hydrogel-
bead system may mimic soil experiments (Ma et al. 2019).

3

BS Breeding Science

Preview

Fig. 2. Root  box-pin  board  root  sampling  method.  (A)  Root  sam‐
pling  pin  board.  (B)  Insertion  of  pin  board  plus  plastic  film  into  the
soil in root box for collecting the whole root system. (C) Removal of
root system from pin board with a plastic film after rinsing off the soil
with water. (D) Root image prepared using a 2D scanner.

A  current  trend  in  root  phenotyping  is  precise  and  non‐
destructive  3D  imaging  techniques  such  as  magnetic  reso‐
nance imaging (MRI) and X-ray computed tomography (X-
ray CT). White neutron beam radiography and tomography
are also used in root imaging (Shinohara et al. 2020, Tötzke
et al. 2017). As water decays the neutron beam, these sys‐
tems  readily  detect  water  and  roots.  Both  plant  RSA
(Shinohara et al. 2020, Tötzke et al. 2017) and rhizosphere
water content can be clearly visualized by neutron tomogra‐
phy  (Tötzke  et  al.  2017).  However,  neutron  beam  irradia‐
tion may damage plant tissues. In contrast, MRI and X-ray
CT  have  no  such  negative  effects  on  plants  (van
Dusschoten et al. 2016, Zappala et al. 2013). Both MRI and
X-ray CT may be combined with positron emission tomog‐
raphy  (PET)  to  visualize  carbon  allocation  (Garbout  et  al.
2012, Jahnke et al. 2009). While both techniques can pro‐
duce clear 3D root images, X-ray CT can resolve them into
thin root diameters (Metzner et al. 2015). Furthermore, X-
ray CT is more widely used than MRI for root phenotyping
as  its  cost  is  lower  and  non-medical  X-ray  CT  scanners
with  vertical  sample  loading  are  available  (Atkinson et  al.
2019).  Nevertheless,  both  techniques  only  slowly  scan  the
RSA,  reconstruct  3D  images,  and  extract  RSA  traits.
Teramoto et al. (2020) reported the development of a high-

4

Takahashi and Pradal

throughput  rice  (Oryza  sativa)  RSA  phenotyping  platform
by  X-ray  CT.  They  optimized  plant  growth  and  CT  scan‐
ning  conditions  and  reduced  the  operating  time.  CT  scan‐
ning  and  image  processing  could  be  completed  in  10 min
and  2–8 min,  respectively,  depending  on  hardware  perfor‐
mance.  However,  restricted  rhizosphere  size  is  a  potential
limitation of these imaging methods. Soil water content and
bias  may  affect  root  imaging  by  each  method.  Therefore,
most  studies  use  pots  of  diameter  <100 mm  in  diameter.
Nevertheless,  the  pot  size  may  be  enlarged  to  200 mm  by
adjusting  the  soil  type,  soil  particle  size,  scanning  condi‐
tions,  and/or  root  detection  algorithms  (Teramoto  et  al.
2020).  These  improvements  could  help  facilitate  non‐
destructive,  large-scale  RSA  analyses,  quantitative  trait
locus  (QTL)  assays,  and  genome-wide  association  studies
(GWAS).

Phenotyping root structures and minimum infor‐
mation required for root modeling

The  RSA  is  the  result  of  interactions  between  genetically
driven  endogenous  growth  processes  and  environmentally
determined exogenous constraints (Barthélémy and Caraglio
2007). Continuous root growth and ongoing branching cre‐
ate a highly complex network whose components have def‐
inite topology, geometry, and shape (Balduzzi et al. 2017).
The  root  network  structure  or  topology  supports  various
fluxes such as the root hydraulic architecture. The interac‐
tion between the RSA and its environment depends mainly
on  3D  root  distribution  or  the  RSA  geometry  (Godin  and
Sinoquet 2005).

The  complete  RSA  can  be  automatically  or  semi-
automatically captured by root phenotyping image analysis
software  such  as  SmartRoot  (Lobet  et  al.  2011)  and
RootNav  (Pound  et  al.  2013).  The  Root  System  Markup
Language  format  generates  the  RSA  data  on  a  standard
XML  format  and  is  shared  by  various  root  phenotyping
programs  (Lobet  et  al.  2015).  It  involves  root  topology,
geometry,  and  properties  acquired  from  2D  or  3D  images
taken  at  one  or  more  time  points.  Capturing  the  complete
RSA of real soils is labor-intensive and has a low through‐
put. However, certain root traits can be evaluated at a rela‐
tively  high  throughput  by  manual  measurements  or  using
image  analysis  tools  such  as  the  Digital  Imaging  of  Root
Traits platform (Bucksch et al. 2014).

After extracting the root data, it is necessary to identify
the  traits  that  are  meaningful  and  pertinent  for  a  specific
experiment.  Hence,  “root 
ideotype”  for  a  particular
research  should  be  defined  based  on  the  specific  environ‐
ment  that  breeders  are  investigating.  “Steep,  cheap,  and
deep”  has  been  proposed  as  the  ideotype  root  system  for
maize (Lynch 2013). However, it may vary with soil envi‐
ronment.  A  deep  root  system  (“deep”)  is  required  because
water  percolates  and  nitrates  leach  into  deeper  soil  strata
(Lynch  2013).  Under  nitrate-deficient  conditions,  less  lat‐
eral root branching and low crown root numbers (“steep”)

Root phenotyping and modeling in crop plants

are suitable (Saengwilai et al. 2014, Zhan and Lynch 2015).
However,  as  phosphorus,  potassium,  and  ammonium  are
relatively  immobile,  short,  shallow  root  systems  with
numerous lateral roots and long root hairs can more effec‐
tively utilize these resources (Lynch 2013). Therefore, root
number, diameter, angle, and branching pattern are impor‐
tant  traits  in  the  ideotype  for  maize  nitrogen  and  water
acquisition.  As  it  is  important  to  identify  the  target  (ideo‐
type) root traits for each individual study, it might be useful
to  simplify  an  ideotype  design  by  scoring  the  relative
importance  of  root  traits  via  root  modeling.  Certain  root
traits  may  be  used  to  estimate  the  input  parameters  for
functional-structural root models simulating RSA dynamics
(Freschet  et  al.  2020,  Pagès  2016).  Functional-structural
root  models  have  been  extensively  used  to  investigate  the
relationships  between  root  architectural  traits  and  variabil‐
ity 
in  soil  and  spatiotemporal  nutrient  distribution
(Dunbabin  et  al.  2013,  Ndour  et  al.  2017).  These  models
simulate  the  structural  and  spatial  distribution  of  the  root
system and directly integrate developmental processes such
as  elongation  and  branching,  and  their  interaction  with
root-level soil properties (Pagès and Picon‐Cochard 2014).
Root  architectural  models  using  plant  phenotyping  data  as
input  parameters  have  been  recently  developed.  These
include  ArchiSimple  (Pagès  et  al.  2012),  DigR  (Barczi
et  al.  2018),  OpenSimRoot  (Postma  et  al.  2017),  and
CRootBox  (Schnepf  et  al.  2018).  They  were  designed  to
represent  interspecies  root  architectural  diversity  resulting
from  interactions  with  various  environmental  conditions
(Muller et al. 2019, Pagès and Picon‐Cochard 2014).

For  each  root  category,  most  models  define  a  set  of
parameters  that  specify  the  main  processes  such  as  emis‐
sion, elongation, and ramification. Emission is specified by
the  maximum  number  of  basal  and  shoot-bore  roots  and
root  growth  time  intervals.  Elongation  is  defined  by  the
elongation  rate,  root  lifespan,  and  maximum  root  length.
Branching is expressed by the length between ramifications,
the  ratio  of  the  parent-to-daughter  root  diameter,  and  geo‐
metric data such as insertion angle and tropisms. These pa‐
rameters must be measured for each root type. ArchiSimple
was developed to reduce the number of required parameters
(Pagès and Picon‐Cochard 2014). It uses only the meristem
size  or  apical  diameter  as  a  continuous  descriptor  of  the
root  developmental  capacity.  It  eliminates  the  requirement
for  multiple  parameters  for  each  root  type  and  branching
order. The meristem size is estimated by the tip diameter of
young  roots  (see  Freschet  et  al.  2020).  In  this  model,  the
elongation rate varies with root diameter. A specific param‐
eter defines the ratio of the lateral-to-mother root diameter
and models the evolution of root length and elongation rate
through  branching  orders.  Lateral  root  growth  pattern  di‐
versity is modeled by incorporating a stochastic function to
assign  lateral  root  diameter  at  emergence.  The  lateral  root
types emerge as a consequence of this stochasticity (Muller
et al. 2019). The root primordium elongates only when its
diameter  exceeds  a  specified  threshold.  ArchiSimple  has

5

Breeding Science
Preview

BS

been  used  to  characterize  lateral  root  diversity  in  140
monocot  and  dicot  species  (Pagès  2016).  ArchiSimple
requires only 13 parameters that can be estimated by exca‐
vating  the  RSA.  The  minimum  diameter  (Dmin;  smallest
diameter of all elongated roots), maximum diameter (Dmax;
diameter  of  the  primary  root),  and  the  relative  diameter
range  (Drange)  that  characterizes  diameter  distribution.
Diameter  distribution  is  easily  acquired  using  open-source
image  analysis  software  such  as  ImageJ  with  image  data.
The  potential  elongation  rate  is  proportional  to  the  diame‐
ter.  EL  is  the  slope  of  the  root  elongation  rate  versus  the
root  tip  diameter.  EL  can  be  approximated  for  some  roots
using  their  length,  diameter  at  the  tip  (where  the  root  is
cylindrical), and their age. To capture branching, it is nec‐
essary  to  measure  the  interbranch  distance  on  the  thick
roots (IBD) and the average ratio of diameter of the daugh‐
ter root to that of the mother root (RDM). The IBD can be
estimated  from  the  branching  density  or  directly  from  the
image  (Fig. 3).  RDM  is  approximated  by  sampling  some
roots  and  mapping  their  tip  diameter  to  the  one  of  their
mother roots. In Fig. 3, this can be achieved by computing
the ratio of the tip diameter of the lateral roots to that of tap
root.  The  final  parameter  is  the  coefficient  of  variation  of
the diameter of laterals (VarD). This factor allows the dif‐
ferentiation  of  homogeneous  or  highly  variable  laterals.
The other parameters are the maximum number of adventi‐
tious roots (MNP), their emission rate (ER), the coefficient
of growth duration (GD; links root growth duration to root
diameter),  the  coefficient  of  gravitropism  influencing  root
reorientation  and  representing  plagiotropism  or  gravit‐
ropism, the coefficient of life duration for decay and abscis‐
sion, and a parameter to compute radial growth (Pagès and
Picon‐Cochard  2014).  These  parameters  would  be  easily
obtained  from  “legacy  root  data”,  which  have  been  pre‐
served in old or unpublished formats. Scanning images may
also be used for RSA imaging, but one of the simple legacy
data  may  be  photographs  acquired  using  cameras  in  the
field  (Fig. 3).  Here,  we  used  field  photographs  as  legacy
data  for  simulations.  The  required  root  parameters  were
estimated manually. Fig. 3 shows the reconstruction of two
soybean  genotypes  using  ArchiSimple.  Model  parameters
were estimated from the legacy data by using image analy‐
sis software.

Conclusion and perspectives

Phenomics measures plant architectural traits in the canopy
and  root  system.  Phenotyping  platforms  facilitate  these
measurements of roots and shoots. Recent advances in root
phenomics  will  enable  large-scale,  high-throughput,  and
precise  RSA  imaging.  However,  phenomics  generally
focuses only on the measurement and identification of phe‐
notypic variation in plant traits rather than the relationship
between  phenotype  and  function.  “Functional  phenomics”
attempts to describe the relationship between plant pheno‐
type  and  physiological  functions  in  the  same  way  that

BS Breeding Science

Preview

Takahashi and Pradal

Fig. 3. Soybean root system reconstruction from simulation. The experimental field consists mainly of sand, and therefore, its water content
was easy to control. Photographs prepared for RSA measurements in two different cultivars. The lateral root angle, lateral root number, tap and
lateral root lengths, interbranch distance on lateral roots (IBD), and diameter range of lateral root including Dmax and Dmin were measured from
photographs. Finally, root systems of the two genotypes at 7 days were simulated using ArchiSimple. Parameters of genotype 309 were as fol‐
lows:  Dmin = 0.19 mm;  Dmax = 0.73 mm;  EL = 34 day–1;  IBD = 1.48 mm;  RMD = 0.41;  VarD = 0.2  and  angle = 76°.  Parameters  of  genotype  324
were as follows: Dmin = 0.09 mm; Dmax = 0.70 mm; EL = 38 day–1; IBD = 1.54 mm; RMD = 0.30; VarD = 0.28 and angle = 75°.

“functional  genomics”  shows  the  functions  of  genes  and
proteins  and  their  interactions  (York  2019).  There  are
several  important  traits  in  functional  root  phenomics.
Nodal  root  number  and  growth  angle  might  correlate  with
shoot biomass and yield (Saengwilai et al. 2014, Slack et al.
2018 (https://doi.org/10.1101/280917), Wasson et al. 2012).
Photosynthesis and photosynthate allocation influence total
root length and alter root-shoot balance (York et al. 2013).
Soil resource utilization and root ion uptake kinetics affect
root  growth  and  morphology  (Griffiths  and  York  2020).
The root cortical aerenchyma is an air space formed by pro‐
grammed cell death. It reduces the number of living cortical
cells,  lowers  the  root  segment  respiration  rates  (Fan  et  al.
2003),  and  facilitates  nutrient  mobilization  (Postma  and
Lynch  2011).  The  cortical  area  is  determined  by  the
aerenchyma, cortical cell size, and cortical cell file number
(Jaramillo et al. 2013). The cortex-to-stele ratio contributes
to  crop  tolerance  to  soil  waterlogging  (Yamauchi  et  al.
2019,  reviewed  in  this  issue  by  Yamauchi  et  al.  2021).
Therefore, root anatomical features are important for under‐
standing  the  relationships  between  root  phenotype  and
plant  growth.  Ndour  et  al.  (2017)  presented  a  functional-
structural  drought  stress  RSA  model  including  physiologi‐
cal, morphological, and anatomical data. Linking final yield
or root phenotype to physiological, morphological, anatom‐
ical,  and  environmental  data  is  a  desirable  direction  for
future RSA analysis. Rhizosphere microbiome composition
may  be  associated  with  certain  types  of  root  morphology
(Saleem  et  al.  2018)  and  domestication  in  the  common
bean  (Phaseolus  vulgaris)  (Pérez-Jaramillo  et  al.  2017).
Elucidation  of  the  interactions  between  the  rhizosphere

microbiome  and  plant  roots  is  important  for  breeding
highly efficient roots.

To enhance root system efficiency, a whole-plant pheno‐
typing platform associated with the RSA analysis should be
developed under various environmental conditions (Tardieu
et  al.  2017).  However,  traditional  root  phenotyping  meth‐
ods  and  old,  unpublished  data  should  be  still  informative
for  the  improvement  of  root  system.  Here,  we  identified
and  presented  the  minimum  data  required  for  root  model‐
ing.  These  minimum  data  could  be  easily  extracted  from
the old format data. We hoped that the methodologies pro‐
posed  in  the  present  review  can  enable  the  re-use  of  these
legacy data.

Author Contribution Statement

H.T.  and  C.P.  wrote  the  manuscript.  H.T.  contributed  to
phenotyping. C.P. contributed to modeling.

Acknowledgments

This  work  was  supported  by  JST  CREST  (Grant  No.
JPMJCR16O2).

Literature Cited

Atkinson,  J.A.,  M.P.  Pound,  M.J.  Bennett  and  D.M.  Wells  (2019)
Uncovering the hidden half of plants using new advances in root
phenotyping. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 55: 1–8.

Balduzzi,  M.,  B.M.  Binder,  A.  Bucksch,  C.  Chang,  L.  Hong,  A.S.
Iyer-Pascuzzi,  C.  Pradal  and  E.E.  Sparks  (2017)  Reshaping  plant

6

Root phenotyping and modeling in crop plants

biology: qualitative and quantitative descriptors for plant morphol‐
ogy. Front. Plant Sci. 8: 117.

Bao, Y., P. Aggarwal, N.E. Robbins, C.J. Sturrock, M.C. Thompson,
H.Q.  Tan,  C.  Tham,  L.  Duan,  P.L.  Rodriguez,  T.  Vernoux  et  al.
(2014)  Plant  roots  use  a  patterning  mechanism  to  position  lateral
root branches toward available water. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
111: 9319–9324.

Barczi,  J.-F.,  H.  Rey,  S.  Griffon  and  C.  Jourdan  (2018)  DigR:  a
generic  model  and  its  open  source  simulation  software  to  mimic
three-dimensional  root-system  architecture  diversity.  Ann.  Bot.
121: 1089–1104.

Barthélémy, D. and Y. Caraglio (2007) Plant architecture: a dynamic,
multilevel  and  comprehensive  approach  to  plant  form,  structure
and ontogeny. Ann. Bot. 99: 375–407.

Bucksch, A., J. Burridge, L.M. York, A. Das, E. Nord, J.S. Weitz and
J.P. Lynch (2014) Image-based high-throughput field phenotyping
of crop roots. Plant Physiol. 166: 470–486.

Chen,  T.W.,  L.  Caberera-Bosquet,  S.A.  Prado,  R.  Perez,  S.  Artzet,
C.  Pradal,  A.  Coupel-Ledru,  C.  Fournier  and  F.  Tardieu  (2019)
Genetic and environmental dissection of biomass accumulation in
multi-genotype maize canopies. J. Exp. Bot. 70: 2523–2534.

Chen, Y., J. Palta, P.V.V. Prasad and K.H.M. Siddique (2020) Pheno‐
typic  variability  in  bread  wheat  root  systems  at  the  early  vegeta‐
tive stage. BMC Plant Biol. 20: 185.

Correa,  J.,  J.A.  Postma,  M.  Watt  and  T.  Wojciechowski  (2019)  Soil
compaction and the architectural plasticity of root systems. J. Exp.
Bot. 70: 6019–6034.

Dunbabin,  V.M.,  J.A.  Postma,  A.  Schnepf,  L.  Pagès,  M.  Javaux,  L.
Wu,  D.  Leitner,  Y.L.  Chen,  Z.  Rengel  and  A.J.  Diggle  (2013)
Modelling  root-soil  interactions  using  three-dimensional  models
of root growth, architecture and function. Plant Soil 372: 93–124.
Fan,  M.,  J.  Zhu,  C.  Richards,  K.M.  Brown  and  J.P.  Lynch  (2003)
Physiological  roles  for  aerenchyma  in  phosphorus-stressed  roots.
Funct. Plant Biol. 30: 493–506.

Freschet, G., L. Pagès, C. Iversen, L. Comas, B. Rewald, C. Roumet,
J. Klimešová, M. Zadworny, H. Poorter, J. Postma et al. (2020) A
starting  guide  to  root  ecology:  strengthening  ecological  concepts
and  standardizing  root  classification,  sampling,  processing  and
trait measurements. https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-02918834.
Garbout, A., L.J. Munkholm, S.B. Hansen, B.M. Petersen, O.L. Munk
and R. Pajor (2012) The use of PET/CT scanning technique for 3D
visualization  and  quantification  of  real–time  soil/plant  interac‐
tions. Plant Soil 352: 113–127.

Godin,  C.  and  H.  Sinoquet  (2005)  Functional-structural  plant  mod‐

elling. New Phytol. 166: 705–708.

Griffiths, M. and L.M. York (2020) Targeting root ion uptake kinetics
to  increase  plant  productivity  and  nutrient  use  efficiency.  Plant
Physiol. 182: 1854–1868.

Guimarães,  P.H.R.,  I.P.  de  Lima,  A.P.  de  Castro,  A.C.  Lanna,  P.
Guimarães  Santos  Melo  and  M.  de  Raïssac  (2020)  Phenotyping
root  systems  in  a  set  of  Japonica  rice  accessions:  Can  structural
traits predict the response to drought? Rice (N Y) 13: 67.

Horton, P. (2000) Prospects for crop improvement through the genetic
manipulation  of  photosynthesis:  morphological  and  biochemical
aspects of light capture. J. Exp. Bot. 51: 475–485.

Jahnke, S., M.I. Menzel, D. Van Dusschoten, G.W. Roeb, J. Bühler, S.
Minwuyelet, P. Blümler, V.M. Temperton, T. Hombach, M. Streun
et  al.  (2009)  Combined  MRI-PET  dissects  dynamic  changes  in
plant structures and functions. Plant J. 59: 634–644.

Jaramillo,  R.E.,  E.A.  Nord,  J.G.  Chimungu,  K.M.  Brown  and  J.P.
Lynch (2013) Root cortical burden influences drought tolerance in

7

Breeding Science
Preview

BS

maize. Ann. Bot. 112: 429–437.

Jeudy,  C.,  M.  Adrian,  C.  Baussard,  C.  Bernard,  E.  Bernaud,  V.
Bourion, H. Busset, L. Cabrera-Bosquet, F. Cointault, S. Han et al.
(2016) RhizoTubes as a new tool for high throughput imaging of
plant  root  development  and  architecture:  Test,  comparison  with
pot grown plants and validation. Plant Methods 12: 31.

Johnson,  M.G.,  D.T.  Tingey,  D.L.  Phillips  and  M.J.  Storm  (2001)
Advancing  fine  root  research  with  minirhizotrons.  Environ.  Exp.
Bot. 45: 263–289.

Kimura, R., M. Kamichika, N. Takayama, N. Matsuoka and X. Zhang
(2004)  Heat  balance  and  soil  moisture  in  the  Loess  Plateau
[Shanxi], China. J. Agr. Meteorol. (Tokyo) 60: 103–113.

Kono, Y., A. Yamauchi, T. Nonoyama, J. Tatsumi and N. Kawamura
(1987)  A  revised  experimental  system  of  root-soil  interaction  for
laboratory workers. Env. Cont. Biol. 25: 141–151.

Kücke,  M.,  H.  Schmid  and  A.  Spiess  (1995)  A  comparison  of  four
methods  for  measuring  roots  of  field  crops  in  three  contrasting
soils. Plant Soil 172: 63–71.

Liu,  S.,  P.  Martre,  S.  Buis,  M.  Abichou,  B.  Andrieu  and  F.  Baret
(2019) Estimation of plant and canopy architectural traits using the
digital plant phenotyping platform. Plant Physiol. 181: 881–890.
Lobet, G., L. Pagès and X. Draye (2011) A novel image-analysis tool‐
box  enabling  quantitative  analysis  of  root  system  architecture.
Plant Physiol. 157: 29–39.

Lobet, G., M.P. Pound, J. Diener, C. Pradal, X. Draye, C. Godin, M.
Javaux, D. Leitner, F. Meunier, P. Nacry et al. (2015) Root system
markup  language:  toward  a  unified  root  architecture  description
language. Plant Physiol. 167: 617–627.

Lynch, J.P. (2007) Roots of the second green revolution. Aust. J. Bot.

55: 493–512.

Lynch,  J.P.  (2013)  Steep,  cheap  and  deep:  an  ideotype  to  optimize
water  and  N  acquisition  by  maize  root  systems.  Ann.  Bot.  112:
347–357.

Ma,  L.,  Y.  Shi,  O.  Siemianowski,  B.  Yuan,  T.K.  Egner,  S.V.
Mirnezami, K.R. Lind, B. Ganapathysubramanian, V. Venditti and
L.  Cademartiri  (2019)  Hydrogel-based  transparent  soils  for  root
phenotyping  in  vivo.  Proc.  Natl.  Acad.  Sci.  USA  116:  11063–
11068.

Mathan,  J.,  J.  Bhattacharya  and  A.  Ranjan  (2016)  Enhancing  crop
yield  by  optimizing  plant  developmental  features.  Development
143: 3283–3294.

McGrail, R.K., D.A. Van Sanford and D.H. McNear, Jr. (2020) Trait-
based root phenotyping as a necessary tool for crop selection and
improvement. Agronomy 10: 1328.

Metzner, R., A. Eggert, D. Van Dusschoten, D. Pflugfelder, S. Gerth,
U. Schurr, N. Uhlmann and S. Jahnke (2015) Direct comparison of
MRI and X-ray CT technologies for 3D imaging of root systems in
soil:  potential  and  challenges  for  root  trait  quantification.  Plant
Methods 11: 1–11.

Muller,  B.,  Y.  Guédon,  S.  Passot,  G.  Lobet,  P.  Nacry,  L.  Pagès,  M.
Wissuwa and X. Draye (2019) Lateral roots: Random diversity in
adversity. Trends Plant Sci. 24: 810–825.

Ndour,  A.,  V.  Vadez,  C.  Pradal  and  M.  Lucas  (2017)  Virtual  plants
need  water  too:  Functional-structural  root  system  models  in  the
context of drought tolerance breeding. Front. Plant Sci. 8: 1577.
Paez-Garcia, A., C.M. Motes, W. Scheible, R. Chen, E.B. Blancaflor
and  M.J.  Monteros  (2015)  Root  traits  and  phenotyping  strategies
for plant improvement. Plants (Basel) 4: 334–355.

Pagès,  L.,  D.  Moreau,  V.  Sarlikioti,  H.  Boukcim  and  C.  Nguyen
(2012)  ArchiSimple:  A  parsimonious  model  of  the  root  system
architecture.  2012  IEEE  4th  International  Symposium  on  Plant

BS Breeding Science

Preview

Takahashi and Pradal

Growth  Modeling,  Simulation,  Visualization  and  Applications,
IEEE.

analysis  of  rice  root  distribution  from  field  images.  Plant
Phenomics 2020: 3194308.

Pagès,  L.  and  C.  Picon‐Cochard  (2014)  Modelling  the  root  system
architecture  of  Poaceae.  Can  we  simulate  integrated  traits  from
morphological parameters of growth and branching? New Phytol.
204: 149–158.

Pagès,  L.  (2016)  Branching  patterns  of  root  systems:  Comparison  of
monocotyledonous  and  dicotyledonous  species.  Ann.  Bot.  118:
1337–1346.

Pérez-Jaramillo,  J.E.,  V.J.  Carrión,  M.  Bosse,  L.F.  Ferrão,  M.  de
Hollander,  A.A.F.  Garcia,  C.A.  Ramírez,  R.  Mendes  and  J.M.
Raaijmakers (2017) Linking rhizosphere microbiome composition
of wild and domesticated Phaseolus vulgaris to genotypic and root
phenotypic traits. ISME J. 11: 2244–2257.

Tilman, D. (1998) The greening of the green revolution. Nature 396:

211–212.

Tötzke, C., N. Kardjilov, I. Manke and S.E. Oswald (2017) Capturing
3D water flow in rooted soil by ultra-fast neutron tomography. Sci.
Rep. 7: 1–9.

Trachsel,  S.,  S.M.  Kaeppler,  K.M.  Brown  and  J.P.  Lynch  (2011)
Shovelomics:  High  throughput  phenotyping  of  maize  (Zea  mays
L.) root architecture in the field. Plant Soil 341: 75–87.

van  Dusschoten,  D.,  R.  Metzner,  J.  Kochs,  J.A.  Postma,  D.
Pflugfelder,  J.  Bühler,  U.  Schurr  and  S.  Jahnke  (2016)  Quantita‐
tive 3D analysis of plant roots growing in soil using magnetic res‐
onance imaging. Plant Physiol. 170: 1176–1188.

Postma, J.A. and J.P. Lynch (2011) Theoretical evidence for the func‐
tional benefit of root cortical aerenchyma in soils with low phos‐
phorus availability. Ann. Bot. 107: 829–841.

Wasson, A., L. Bischof, A. Zwart and M. Watt (2016) A portable fluo‐
rescence spectroscopy imaging system for automated root pheno‐
typing in soil cores in the field. J. Exp. Bot. 67: 1033–1043.

Postma,  J.A.,  C.  Kuppe,  M.R.  Owen,  N.  Mellor,  M.  Griffiths,  M.J.
Bennett, J.P. Lynch and M. Watt (2017) OpenSimRoot: widening
the  scope  and  application  of  root  architectural  models.  New
Phytol. 215: 1274–1286.

Wasson,  A.P.,  R.  Richards,  R.  Chatrath,  S.  Misra,  S.S.  Prasad,  G.
Rebetzke, J. Kirkegaard, J. Christopher and M. Watt (2012) Traits
and selection strategies to improve root systems and water uptake
in water-limited wheat crops. J. Exp. Bot. 63: 3485–3498.

Pound,  M.P.,  A.P.  French,  J.A.  Atkinson,  D.M.  Wells,  M.J.  Bennett
and T. Pridmore (2013) RootNav: Navigating images of complex
root architectures. Plant Physiol. 162: 1802–1814.

Weaver, J.E., F.C. Jean and J.W. Crist (1922) Development and activi‐
ties of roots of crop plants, a study in crop ecology. Agronomy &
Horticulture, p. 511.

Rellán-Álvarez, R., G. Lobet, H. Lindner, P.-L. Pradier, J. Sebastian,
M.-C.  Yee,  Y.  Geng,  C.  Trontin,  T.  LaRue,  A.  Schrager-Lavelle
et  al.  (2015)  GLO-Roots:  An  imaging  platform  enabling  multi‐
dimensional  characterization  of  soil-grown  root  systems.  Elife  4:
e07597.

Wu, J. and Y. Guo (2014) An integrated method for quantifying root

architecture of field-grown maize. Ann. Bot. 114: 841–851.

Yamauchi, T., F. Abe, N. Tsutsumi and M. Nakazono (2019) Root cor‐
tex  provides  a  venue  for  gas-space  formation  and  is  essential  for
plant adaptation to waterlogging. Front. Plant Sci. 10: 259.

Rogers, E.D. and P.N. Benfey (2015) Regulation of plant root system
architecture:  implications  for  crop  advancement.  Curr.  Opin.
Biotechnol. 32: 93–98.

Yamauchi,  T.,  K.  Noshita  and  N.  Tsutsumi  (2021)  Climate-smart
crops:  key  root  anatomical  traits  that  confer  flooding  tolerance.
Breed. Sci. 71 (in press).

Saengwilai, P., X. Tian and J.P. Lynch (2014) Low crown root number
enhances  nitrogen  acquisition  from  low–nitrogen  soils  in  maize.
Plant Physiol. 166: 581–589.

Saleem,  M.,  A.D.  Law,  M.R.  Sahib,  Z.H.  Pervaiz  and  Q.  Zhang
(2018) Impact of root system architecture on rhizosphere and root
microbiome. Rhizosphere 6: 47–51.

Schnepf, A., D. Leitner, M. Landl, G. Lobet, T.H. Mai, S. Morandage,
C.  Sheng,  M.  Zörner,  J.  Vanderborght  and  H.  Vereecken  (2018)
CRootBox: A structural–functional modelling framework for root
systems. Ann. Bot. 121: 1033–1053.

Shinohara, T., T. Kai, K. Oikawa, T. Nakatani, M. Segawa, K. Hiroi,
Y.  Su,  M.  Ooi,  M.  Harada,  H.  Iikura  et  al.  (2020)  The  energy-
resolved neutron imaging system, RADEN. Rev. Sci. Instrum. 91:
043302.

Tardieu,  F.,  L.  Cabrera-Bosquet,  T.  Pridmore  and  M.  Bennett  (2017)
Plant  phenomics,  from  sensors  to  knowledge.  Curr.  Biol.  27:
R770–R783.

Teramoto, S., S. Takayasu, Y. Kitomi, Y. Arai-Sanoh, T. Tanabata and
Y. Uga (2020) High-throughput three-dimensional visualization of
root  system  architecture  of  rice  using  X-ray  computed  tomogra‐
phy. Plant Methods 16: 1–14.

Teramoto,  S.  and  Y.  Uga  (2020)  A  deep  learning-based  phenotypic

York,  L.M.,  E.  Nord  and  J.  Lynch  (2013)  Integration  of  root  phenes

for soil resource acquisition. Front. Plant Sci. 4: 355.

York, L.M. (2019) Functional phenomics: an emerging field integrat‐
ing high-throughput phenotyping, physiology, and bioinformatics.
J. Exp. Bot. 70: 379–386.

Yu, J., J. Shi, X. Ma, P. Dang, Y. Yan, A.I. Mamedov, I. Shainberg and
G.J. Levy (2017) Superabsorbent polymer properties and concen‐
tration effects on water retention under drying conditions. Soil Sci.
Soc. Am. J. 81: 889–901.

Zappala, S., J.R. Helliwell, S.R. Tracy, S. Mairhofer, C.J. Sturrock, T.
Pridmore,  M.  Bennett  and  S.J.  Mooney  (2013)  Effects  of  X-ray
dose  on  rhizosphere  studies  using  X-ray  computed  tomography.
PLoS ONE 8: e67250.

Zenone, T., G. Morelli, M. Teobaldelli, F. Fischanger, M. Matteucci,
M.  Sordini,  A.  Armani,  C.  Ferrè,  T.  Chiti  and  G.  Seufert  (2008)
Preliminary use of ground-penetrating radar and electrical resistiv‐
ity tomography to study tree roots in pine forests and poplar plan‐
tations. Funct. Plant Biol. 35: 1047–1058.

Zhan,  A.  and  J.P.  Lynch  (2015)  Reduced  frequency  of  lateral  root
branching improves N capture from low-N soils in maize. J. Exp.
Bot. 66: 2055–2065.

8

