Publishing Uncertainty on the Semantic Web: Blurring
the LOD Bubbles
Ahmed El Amine Djebri, Andrea G B Tettamanzi, Fabien Gandon

To cite this version:

Ahmed El Amine Djebri, Andrea G B Tettamanzi, Fabien Gandon. Publishing Uncertainty on the
Semantic Web: Blurring the LOD Bubbles. ICCS 2019 - 24th International Conference on Conceptual
Structures, Jul 2019, Marburg, Germany. pp.42-56, ￿10.1007/978-3-030-23182-8_4￿. ￿hal-02167174￿

HAL Id: hal-02167174

https://inria.hal.science/hal-02167174

Submitted on 27 Jun 2019

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

Publishing Uncertainty on the Semantic Web:
Blurring the LOD bubbles

Ahmed El Amine Djebri, Andrea G.B. Tettamanzi, and Fabien Gandon

Universit´e Cˆote d’Azur, Inria, CNRS, I3S, France
djebri.emp@gmail.com
andrea.tettamanzi@univ-cotedazur.fr
fabien.gandon@inria.fr

Abstract. The open nature of the Web exposes it to the many imper-
fections of our world. As a result, before we can use knowledge obtained
from the Web, we need to represent that fuzzy, vague, ambiguous and un-
certain information. Current standards of the Semantic Web and Linked
Data do not support such a representation in a formal way and indepen-
dently of any theory. We present a new vocabulary and a framework to
capture and handle uncertainty in the Semantic Web. First, we deﬁne
a vocabulary for uncertainty and explain how it allows the publishing
of uncertainty information relying on diﬀerent theories. In addition, we
introduce an extension to represent and exchange calculations involved
in the evaluation of uncertainty. Then we show how this model and its
operational deﬁnitions support querying a data source containing diﬀer-
ent levels of uncertainty metadata. Finally, we discuss the perspectives
with a view on supporting reasoning over uncertain linked data.

Keywords: Uncertainty · Linked Data · Semantic Web.

1

Introduction

Many applications consume data from the World Wide Web either as main data
to perform some analysis or as additional data to augment internal databases.
However, the Web is an open world where everyone can state any information,
with the possibility of altering existing assertions and publishing incorrect, am-
biguous, misleading or uncertain information. In addition, users can be biased
against controversial sources that might aﬀord correct and valid information,
and blindly trust some other sources. The lack of objectivity and the deﬁcien-
cies of the Web are projected onto the Semantic Web [1] and the Linked Data
[2], as the latter is mostly populated by harvesting existing Web resources. For
instance, a huge amount of data in Freebase [3] was imported automatically and
independently of the approval of the community. Before these external sources
may be used in data mining or other data processing, their reliability must be
assessed.

Uncertainty might diﬀer from one use case to another in terms of nature and
requirements. It can take the form of inconsistencies, incompleteness, ambiguity,

2

A. Djebri et al.

vagueness, etc. The use of such uncertain data requires a speciﬁc representation
which the current standards of the Semantic Web of Linked data are not able to
fulﬁll without extensions. Although the Semantic Web technologies have been
adopted in many applications over the last two decades—recommender systems
[4], news aggregators [5], and even the legal domain [6]—operating with uncertain
data in such domains raises multiple questions. The main question we address
in this paper is: Can uncertainty be formalized on top of the standards of the
Semantic Web to be published on the Web?

To answer this question, we present a new vocabulary for the representation
of uncertainty in the Semantic Web. The meta-Uncertainty vocabulary enables
the representation of custom uncertainty approaches using standard RDF and
the annotation of sentences and worlds using uncertainty values. It also allows
the publishing of uncertainty calculi, enabling the reusability of uncertainty ap-
proaches. Afterward, we present an original framework enabling multi-level un-
certainty mapping to sentences. The latter is mapped to a combination of their
own uncertainty information and that of their context.

Section 2 describes the related work and Section 3 focuses on motivating
scenario and the formalization of uncertainty in the Semantic Web. Section 4
addresses querying and mapping metadata about uncertainty. Section 5 is a
discussion of the current state of our work before we conclude with perspectives.

2 Related Work

The study of deﬁciencies and uncertainty of information issued from the Web
has been the object of a non-negligible part of the research work of the Semantic
Web community. One of the main challenges [7] of interconnected uncertain
data sources is the representation of uncertainty itself. The standardization is
crucial for interoperable applications relying on the uncertain Web in which some
sources have already an application-speciﬁc representation for uncertainty.

Uncertainty in the literature can be represented in many theories, each hav-
ing a formal background, a set of measures and a deﬁned calculus. Dubois et
al. [8] present an overview of uncertainty representations in Artiﬁcial Intelligence
and Decision Theory and discuss multiple theories, such as probability theory,
the theory of evidence of Dempster-Shafer and possibility theory. Klir et al. [9]
observe that dealing with uncertainty consists of four distinct levels: representa-
tion, calculus, measurement, and development of methodological aspects of the
theory. Our focus in this paper is on the ﬁrst two levels.

To adapt the previous uncertainty representations to ﬁt within the Semantic
Web Standards, the W3C Incubator Group URW3-XG proposed an ontology
to formalize data annotation with uncertainty information [10]. The work fo-
cuses on the type and the nature of uncertainty models. However, the ontology
proposed a limited set of theories for which metrics for comparison or evalua-
tion are not oﬀered. That does not allow evaluating uncertainty information nor
comparing two uncertain statements to tell which one is more reliable. Another
work presents a vocabulary for imprecise values [11]. The aim was to use the

Publishing Uncertainty on the Semantic Web: Blurring the LOD bubbles

3

new deﬁnition to solve data fusion problems by extending RDF semantics [12]
with source and interval information. This vocabulary oﬀers to handle fuzzy or
inconsistent data and is useful in time-based reasoning. Yet this vocabulary does
not provide a formal deﬁnition of uncertainty.

Another part of the literature focuses on extending the current standards
of the Semantic Web to ﬁt in the existing uncertainty theories. Some authors
presented probability as a threshold [13] or a conﬁdence score [14] linked to a
graph pattern. Other authors extended the OWL standard by linking a degree
of truth with statements to enable representing Bayesian Networks [15]. More
extensions propose to handle fuzzy values [16] and possibility theory [17] each
using a speciﬁc set of measures depending on the theory. In general, each of
these previous works focuses only on one uncertainty theory and deﬁnes a set
of measurements (features) to rely on while ranking, reasoning, or aggregating
uncertain data. However, limiting the representation of uncertainty to one ap-
proach per application requires implementing as many extensions as existing
approaches. In that case, the problem of sharing and reusing data between the
diﬀerent systems persists.

To the best of our knowledge, there is no work that oﬀers to publish un-
certainty theories alongside their features and calculus. Interesting work from
Dividino et al. [18] introduced the meta-knowledge mapping to statements using
a non-standard representation (Quintuples) and two separated graphs (one for
knowledge, another for meta-knowledge). Their framework enables the system
administrator to deﬁne meta-knowledge properties and, for each property, one
should deﬁne the intended semantics and the knowledge dimension inside the
application in a non-standard format.

From another angle, the use of uncertain information invokes the question
about context, since the reliability of information may diﬀer from one context
to another. A good reference about the importance of a context while reasoning
about data validity can be found in [19]. We are interested in the case where
data stated in a context can inherit its metadata.

Currently, the closest standard representation of contexts in Semantic Web is
Named Graphs [20]. Data can be encapsulated inside a named graph, referenced
by a URI, which can be annotated by metadata. Such representation also enables
expressing and reasoning with diﬀerent viewpoints without creating conﬂicts
or inconsistencies. However, named graphs have no deﬁned semantics in RDF
other than being named containers inside the default graph. Hence, annotating
a named graph does not reﬂect on the contained data as there is no semantic
mapping between the data and their named graph. As mentioned in [21], named
graphs in RDF datasets are irrelevant to determining the truth of a dataset as the
latter depends on the RDF interpretation of the default graph. The document
also indicates the necessity to extend RDFS [22] to support ternary relations.
A simple alternative to named graphs is reiﬁcation, allowing meta-statements
about statements. Nevertheless, the reiﬁed statement does not necessarily assert
the original one and the same problem about the propagation of the metadata
from the associated context is present. A proposal in [23] approves the use of

4

A. Djebri et al.

named graphs as contexts and argues that the former are already deﬁned by a
URI. In addition, the proposal extends the semantics of RDF to use inheritance
in context building. Hence, the sub-contexts are more speciﬁc than the super-
contexts. Nevertheless, in order for this to work at a triple level, each and every
triple should have its own context with personalized metadata. Moreover, this
work considers only overriding general metadata with more speciﬁc ones, hence
the logic of uncertainty theory is not applied since a triple may have diﬀerent
aggregation and conﬂict resolution techniques for each uncertainty features.

3 Formalizing and Publishing Uncertainty on the

Semantic Web

The ﬁrst step in publishing uncertainty is to support its representation in a way
that can be queried and processed. The formalism and the calculation allowed
by this representation must provide results together with uncertainty meta-data
that are helpful to the user in making decisions. In particular, the model we
target must account for the use of diﬀerent theories to represent uncertainty
– for instance across diﬀerent sources – and the calculus required within and
between them – for instance when joining or aggregating data.

In this section we deﬁne the mUnc1 vocabulary, formalized in OWL. Then we
introduce an extension based on the LDScript function deﬁnition language [24]
to deﬁne the calculus attached to a given uncertainty theory. Finally, we provide
the ﬁrst validation of the expressivity of our model w.r.t. the state of the art by
showing how it can capture very diﬀerent types of uncertainty theories.

3.1 mUnc: a Vocabulary for Uncertainty Theories

mUnc (for meta-Uncertainty) is an OWL ontology for representing uncertainty
metadata. It enables publishing uncertainty information based on uncertainty
theories. Figure 1 gives an overview of the core concepts and properties of
mUncincluding: sentences, contexts (worlds) and uncertainty metadata (theo-
ries, features, calculi).

We have taken the deﬁnition of sentence and world proposed by the URW3-
XG. A sentence is an expression evaluating a truth value, while the world repre-
sents the context in which a sentence is stated. Both sentences and worlds, can be
annotated with meta information. For instance, the sentence ex:S1 represent-
ing the triple (cid:104)ex:StefanoTacconi, dbo:height, 188(cid:105) referring to the height
of the football player is stated in the context of the French language chapter
of DBpedia [25], assuming that the latter is consistent [26]. Uncertainty infor-
mation is considered a specialization of the general concept of metadata. This
simpliﬁes the future extensions for other types of metadata such as provenance
or trust. For the same reason, we do not include the concept of Agent, as it can
be included using other vocabularies like W3C PROV 2 Ontology.

1 http://ns.inria.fr/munc/
2 http://www.w3.org/TR/prov-o/

Publishing Uncertainty on the Semantic Web: Blurring the LOD bubbles

5

Fig. 1. Overview of the mUnc ontology and its core concepts

An uncertainty theory (Uncertainty Approach) is linked to a set of features
and operators. The features are the metrics on which uncertainty theory is based
to indicate the degree of truth, credibility, or likelihood of a sentence. Each fea-
ture links a value to the uncertainty information. The operators represent the
logic to apply to the previous values, while the operations are the implemented
calculus for such logic. Other concepts in URW3-XG like the type or the deriva-
tion of uncertainty can be represented as features of an uncertainty approach.

To illustrate the previous deﬁnitions, we can annotate the previous sentence
using probability theory. The latter can be represented using only one feature:
the probability value. We choose three logical operators to include with the
deﬁnition: and, or, not. Listing 1.1 shows how to assert that a sentence ex:S1 is
true with a probability of 0.7.

ex:Probability a munc:UncertaintyApproach;

munc:hasUncertaintyFeature ex:probabilityValue;
munc:hasUncertaintyOperator ex:and, ex:or, ex:not.

ex:probabilityValue a munc:uncertaintyFeature;

rdfs:range xsd:decimal.

ex:S1 munc:hasMeta [a munc:Uncertainty;

munc:hasUncertaintyApproach ex:Probability;
ex:probabilityValue 0.7].

Listing 1.1. Representing the Probabilistic approach using mUnc

3.2 Attaching Uncertainty Calculi to Theories

Semantic Web ontology languages focus on classiﬁcation ontological knowledge
and do not support the provision of procedural attachments or functions inside

6

A. Djebri et al.

ontologies. Our model allows linking the features of uncertainty approaches to
their proper calculi (arithmetic, logical, comparison, etc). To represent the cal-
culi, we rely on the LDScript function deﬁnition language [24]. This language is
an ideal candidate as it is based on the SPARQL ﬁlter language and allows deﬁn-
ing and using extension functions directly inside the Semantic Web framework.
Using LDScript, we can deﬁne functions having a URI as a name and one or
several arguments that are variables in SPARQL syntax. This enables deﬁning
uncertainty operations and link them to features using operators. To continue
with the previous example, considering the fact that the sentence ex:S1 is true
with a probability of 0.7, and is stated in a context ex:C1 in which all facts are
considered true with a probability of 0.9, the conjunction of the two probabilities,
assumed to be independent, is calculated using the formula

P (A ∧ B) = P (A) × P (B).

(1)

The conjunction of the two previous values can be presented to the user using
the function ex:MultiplyIndependentProbability deﬁned using LDScript as
shown in Listing 1.2.

function ex:MultiplyIndependentProbability(?pA, ?pB){

?pA * ?pB

}

Listing 1.2. Conjunction of Independent Probabilities using LDScript

Therefore, binding the function ex:MultiplyIndependentProbability(0.7,
0.9) during a SPARQL query execution will return 0.63. The former deﬁnition
of the probabilistic approach using mUnc can be enriched by linking the URI of
the function to the declared feature:

ex:ProbabilityValue ex:and ex:MultiplyIndependentProbability.

3.3 Validating the Expressivity on State of the Art Theories

As a validation of our approach, we show in this section how it supports the use
of diﬀerent theories to express uncertainty. A ﬁrst example with the probability
theory was presented in the previous section.

The enumeration of the features linked to an uncertainty theory and the
comprehension of their calculus (operations) enable mUnc to represent existing
uncertainty theories that are deﬁned in the literature [9, 8, 27].

We can annotate the previous example using a possibilistic approach, with
validity and completeness as features, as proposed in the work by da Costa
Pereira et al. [28]. In Listing 1.3 we specify also the types for values linked to
the proposed features:

ex:Possibility a munc:UncertaintyApproach;

munc:hasUncertaintyFeatures ex:validity, ex:completeness;
munc:hasUncertaintyOperators ex:and, ex:or, ex:not.
ex:validity, ex:completeness a munc:uncertaintyFeature;

Publishing Uncertainty on the Semantic Web: Blurring the LOD bubbles

7

rdfs:range xsd:decimal.

Listing 1.3. Possibility theory using mUnc

The operations for such features will be diﬀerent as the conjunction of two
validity values is their maximum. The latter can be evaluated by the function
ex:Max deﬁned in the listing 1.4. This function can be deﬁned once and linked
to any uncertainty approach.

function ex:Max(?v1, ?v2){
if(?v1 >= ?v2) { ?v1 }
else { ?v2 }

}

Listing 1.4. Conjunction of validity measures using LDScript

In this example we consider a sentence ex:S2 with no uncertainty informa-
tion, and another sentence ex:S3 imported from another context ex:C2 having
uncertainty information. The latter can be annotated with metadata about the
provenance, which can be provided using PROV vocabulary. This enables the
traceability of uncertainty information.

ex:S2, ex:S3 munc:statedIn ex:C1.

ex:S3 munc:hasMeta [a munc:Uncertainty;

munc:hasUncertaintyApproach ex:Possibility;
ex:validity 1;
ex:completeness 0.3
prov:wasDerivedFrom ex:C2].

ex:C1 munc:hasMeta [a munc:Uncertainty;

munc:hasUncertaintyApproach ex:Possibility;
ex:validity 0.8;
ex:completeness 0.6].

Listing 1.5. Context Annotation

Besides the existing uncertainty theories, mUnc can be used to deﬁne custom
approaches to handle measures (datatypes) that cannot ﬁt in the RDF standard.
For example, we can deﬁne a custom approach to deal with fuzzy values using
lower and upper bounds as uncertainty features, and the several functions about
fuzzy values as uncertainty operations.

In the next section, we will discuss how to link between uncertainty informa-

tion and sentences during the query processing.

4 Querying for Uncertain Linked Data

The presentation of uncertain linked data to the end user requires more infor-
mation to be provided during the query processing, enabling him or her to rank
and choose among the given answers. Since each sentence and context has its

8

A. Djebri et al.

own uncertainty information, if a sentence is stated in a context, uncertainty
information from both should be combined to form a result. For instance, if
a sentence S in a context A has no uncertainty information, it inherits uncer-
tainty information from A (noted as UA). Otherwise, S will be annotated with
a combination of both USA and UA.

4.1 Semantics of RDF with mUnc

Our work focuses on querying n uncertain data sources s1, s2, ..., sn, each possi-
bly containing several named graphs Gij, i ∈ {1, . . . , n} representing each a set of
coherent information. This means that each named graph contains a set of triples
that do not lead to a contradictory reasoning. For example, if a named graph con-
tains a triple (dbo:height, rdf:type, owl:FunctionalProperty), it cannot
have both triples (ex:Person1, dbo:height, 188) and (ex:Person1,
dbo:height, 195). We still can declare both triples in diﬀerent named graphs.
We recall here the deﬁnition of RDF Dataset and perform the link with the set
of contexts.

Deﬁnition 1. (RDF dataset) An RDF dataset of a source si is a collection of
RDF graphs, containing one default graph Gi and a set of named graphs, each
consisting of a pair (uj, Gij) where uj is the IRI of the graph Gij. The set of
named graphs can be the empty set.

As cited in [21], named graphs are suitable for context representation as
they allow encapsulating a set of triples in a graph and annotate the latter with
metadata. Also, each named graph can represent a vision or an opinion over
the reality represented in the source. A sentence can be cited in multiple named
graphs but with diﬀerent uncertainty information. For example, two websites
can state that tomorrow it will rain. The two websites may not be sure about
that information at diﬀerent levels, so they annotate the fact with diﬀerent
uncertainty information. Each of the previous websites can be encapsulated in
a named graph representing a context.

Deﬁnition 2. (Context) A context Cij, j ≥ 0 is a named graph (ui, Gij), j ≥ 0
in the RDF Dataset of a source si.

Each context can be annotated with a set of uncertainty information triples

deﬁned as follows.

is a set of
Deﬁnition 3. (Context Uncertainty) A context uncertainty UCij
pairs (U ncertaintyF eature, U ncertaintyV alue) representing the uncertainty in-
formation about the context Cij, j ≥ 0 in a datasource si .

Triples in the default graph of the source si may present a context on their
own, and they are moved to a named graph Gi0 representing a separate con-
text Ci0. The set of pairs (UCij , Cij) represents the contextual dataset (noted as
CDS(si)) of datasource si.

Publishing Uncertainty on the Semantic Web: Blurring the LOD bubbles

9

Deﬁnition 4. (Contextual Dataset) Given a datasource si and a set of Contexts
Cij, j ≥ 0, each annotated with a set of metadata triples UCij , a contextual
dataset CDS(si) of a datasource si is a set where Ci is the default context
encapsulating metadata about other contexts, Ci0 is the context encapsulating
triples which was stored in the default graph Gi of datasource si.

CDS(si) = {(UCij , Cij) | j ≥ 0}

(2)

Figure 2 illustrates the deﬁnition of contextual datasets.

Fig. 2. Example of context encapsulation

Similar to context uncertainty, a sentence can have its own uncertainty in-

formation deﬁned as follow.

Deﬁnition 5. (Sentence Uncertainty) A sentence uncertainty USCij
is a set of
pairs (U ncertaintyF eature, U ncertaintyV alue) representing the uncertainty in-
formation about the sentence S in a context Cij .

mUnc does not provide any extension of RDF Semantics. Instead, we rely on
the SPARQL query language to provide a mapping between sentences and the
uncertainty information presented to the user. Moreover, we consider mUnc as
an approach to provide deﬁnitions of known and custom uncertainty theories,
for which we do not provide any speciﬁc semantics. The possibility of deﬁning a
calculus alongside with the ontology is an alternative to generalize and to make
reuse of the shared rules between uncertainty theories such as maximizing or
minimizing a feature.

This process does not require a speciﬁc RDF representation (triple, quad,
etc.) on data sources. It grants the possibility to unify data represented with dif-
ferent syntaxes (triples, quads, etc) and from several sources. For this, we extend

10

A. Djebri et al.

the Corese semantic web engine [29] to enable loading and creating contexts in
a transparent way. The process is executed while loading RDF data into Corese.

4.2 Query Resolution

In a semantic Web supporting the representation of uncertainty metadata, query
results should include information about their uncertainty. The latter should be
dependent on both sentences and their context.

Mapping each sentence S with its uncertainty information requires deﬁning a
metadata-mapping mode (see table 1) to link between the metadata annotating
the sentence and the one annotating the context in which the sentence is stated.

Deﬁnition 6. (Meta-Mapping Mode) Given two sets A = {(x, y) | x ∈ F1}, B =
{(w, z) | w ∈ F2}. A meta-mapping mode is the process linking A and B to a
new set C where C = {(f, v) | (f, v1) ∈ A, (f, v2) ∈ B, v = v1 ⊕ v2}.

The meta-mapping modes are basically about choosing a set of uncertainty
features, and what uncertainty value to associate to each feature based on their
associated values in each of the initial sets. In the ﬁrst two modes, only uncer-
tainty information UCij linked to the context Cij is considered with a speciﬁ-
cation of the reading (distributive or collective) [18]. The third mode considers
uncertainty information from the lowest level of granularity only, while the fourth
mode enables inheriting context metadata but overrides the values for existing
features in uncertainty information linked to the sentence.

Mode

Explanation

Considered
level
granularity

of

Context

Context

Inheritance

Distributive
reading

= UCij

ˆUSCij
UCij = Comb({V1, V2, . . . , V|Cij |}), (F, V ) ∈ ˆUSCij

Lowest granu-
larity only

Override-All ˆUSCij

=

(cid:40)

USCij
UCij

(cid:54)= ∅

if USCij
else

Lowest granu-
larity ﬁrst

Override
Exists

if

ˆUSCij

= USCij

∪ {(F, V ) | (F, V ) ∈ UCij , F /∈ USCij

}

All

Combine

ˆUSCij

= {(F, V ) | (F, V ) ∈ UCij , (cid:54) ∃V (cid:48) (F, V (cid:48)) ∈ USCij

}

∪{(F, V ) | (F, V ) ∈ USCij
∪{(F, V ) | ∃VCij , VSCij
V = eval(Calculus(F ), VCij , VSCij
Table 1. Metadata-mapping modes

, (cid:54) ∃V (cid:48)(cid:48) (F, V (cid:48)(cid:48)) ∈ UCij }
(F, VCij ) ∈ UCij , (F, VSCij
)}

) ∈ USCij

,

The set of uncertainty information linked to a sentence S regarding its con-
and deﬁned as

text is denoted as Universal Uncertain Information Set or ˆUSCij
follows.

Publishing Uncertainty on the Semantic Web: Blurring the LOD bubbles

11

Deﬁnition 7. (Universal Uncertain Information Set) A universal uncertain in-
formation set ˆUSCij
of a sentence S in a context Cij of the datasource si is a set
of (U ncertaintyF eature, U ncertaintyV alue) pairs issued by combining the sets
UCij , USCij

using a meta-mapping mode.

The mapping between a sentence S and its universal uncertainty information

is a two steps process:

set ˆUSCij
– Mapping both sentences and contexts to their uncertainty information. We
the uncertainty information about the sentence S cited in the

denote USCij
context Cij and UCij the uncertainty information about the context Cij.

– USCij

is combined with UCij using uncertainty operations linked to each
feature, in order to evaluate its corresponding value in ˆUSCij
. In this step we
apply the metaList algorithm (see Algorithm 1) translated form the formula
in the ﬁfth meta mapping-mode (see table 1): ˆUSCij
, UCij ).

= metaList(USCij

, UCij )

Algorithm 1 metaList: Universal Uncertainty Information Set of a sentence S
in a context Cij of a datasource si
1: procedure metaList(USCij
2:
3:
4:
5:
6:
7:
8:
9:

uncF eatures(x): list of all uncertainty features contained in the set x
uncV alue(f, x): the value linked to the feature f in the set x
Operation(f ): the uncertainty operation linked to the feature f
eval(o, v1, v2): execute the operation o passing the parameters v1, v2
ˆUSCij
if USCij

for all f ∈ uncF eatures(USCij

) ∩ uncF eatures(UCij ) do

(cid:54)= ∅ then

), uncV alue(f, UCij ))

← ∅

v ← eval(Operation(f ), uncV alue(f, USCij
ˆUSCij
∪ {(f, v)}
end for
for all f ∈ uncF eatures(UCij )\(uncF eatures(USCij

← ˆUSCij

)∩uncF eatures(UCij ))

10:
11:
12:

do

v ← uncV alue(f, UCij )
← ˆUSCij
ˆUSCij
end for

∪ {(f, v)}

else

13:
14:
15:
16:
17:
18:
end if
return ˆUSCij
19:
20: end procedure

ˆUSCij

← UCij

(cid:46) the set of universal uncertainty information of the sentence S

In our case, Uncertainty Operations are stored as Linked Functions. This fea-
ture in Corese [29] enables storing LDScript [24] functions in external SPARQL
query ﬁles on the web to be called at the moment of query execution. The former

12

A. Djebri et al.

feature permits publishing and executing the calculi of uncertainty approaches.
Additionally, this approach may be extended to allow the capitalization of ex-
isting software libraries from other programming languages like C++ or Java.

5 Discussion

Compared to the previously published approaches, our work proposes an on-
tology to represent and formalize uncertainty, which covers also calculus. We
rely on RDF standards to present existing uncertainty approaches in a machine-
readable and reusable format. Our vocabulary also enables users to deﬁne their
own uncertainty approaches and publish their deﬁnitions alongside with their
uncertain data, allowing the reusability of the information in other Semantic
Web applications.

The current representation of contexts using named graphs is limited because
it requires the materialization of the graphs. Also, some sentences might be
redundant in diﬀerent contexts. A possible alternative would be the enrichment
of RDF semantics to use munc:statedIn as an equivalent to storing sentences in
named graphs. This gives more ﬂexibility to the process and allows deﬁning new
methods and terms allowing context-overlapping and context-selective querying.
mUnc also enables representing uncertainty about uncertainty information,
by considering the latter as sentences with uncertainty. Yet the combination of
uncertainty information said about uncertainty sentences with the information
provided by the sentences themselves is challenging. For the same reasons, the
framework does not allow the combination of uncertainty information from mul-
tiple data sources using diﬀerent uncertainty approaches. Sentences should be
annotated using the same uncertainty approaches for the calculus to be executed,
otherwise, this presents no problem with other metadata since they will be ap-
pended to the presented information using the metaList algorithm. Providing
a solution for the latter problem, we can add a third step to the previous two-
step process in subsection 4.1 corresponding to the combination of uncertainty
information of identical sentences issued from diﬀerent contexts with diﬀerent
uncertainty information. In any case, the metaList algorithm can be adapted to
diﬀerent types of metadata (ex: provenance).

A security problem about altering information can reach uncertainty calculi:
altering uncertainty operations may alter the ranking of uncertain linked data
and the newly generated data from it.

To the best of our knowledge, there is no previous work that oﬀered a frame-
work to handle uncertainty using a generic standard vocabulary to represent
custom uncertainty approaches. Using our approach, uncertainty is represented
using the Semantic Web standards to be publishable and reusable. In addition,
the use of contexts and calculi allows more selectivity towards the metadata
presented to the user and allows inferring new uncertainty information.

mUnc can extend the work by Cabrio et al. [30] by enriching the proposed
fuzzy labeling algorithms with deﬁnitions of uncertainty theories suitable to the
data. The Linked Data sources can adopt this approach to enrich federated

Publishing Uncertainty on the Semantic Web: Blurring the LOD bubbles

13

queries with uncertainty information and, progressively, build a consensus-based
Linked Data source. A set of other applications such as fake news detection
(deﬁnition of a theory and logic for fake news), argumentation-based systems
and even community-based datasources such as DBpedia can use mUnc to enrich
their future content with uncertainty information.

6 Conclusion

In this paper, we discussed the representation and publication of uncertainty on
the Semantic Web. We presented a vocabulary allowing the representation of
uncertainty theories and the annotation of sentences using the Semantic Web
standards. We explained the publishing of a reusable uncertainty calculi using
LDScript and Corese.

Uncertainty representation is the ﬁrst step of a long process, including the
preliminary calculus of uncertainty values, the propagation of uncertainty among
interconnecting sources. We plan to add the possibility of merging uncertain data
annotated using diﬀerent uncertainty approaches. We would like to implement
context overlapping relying on a set of properties such as weights and thresh-
olds, allowing the selectivity between context metadata and the optimization of
the storage. Finally, this work makes a step towards inconsistency-tolerant and
context-aware uncertain Web of data.

References

1. Berners-Lee, T., Hendler, J., Lassila, O.: The semantic web. Scientiﬁc american

284(5), 34–43 (2001)

2. Bizer, C., Heath, T., Berners-Lee, T.: Linked data: The story so far. In: Semantic
services, interoperability and web applications: emerging concepts, pp. 205–227.
IGI Global (2011)

3. Bollacker, K., Evans, C., Paritosh, P., Sturge, T., Taylor, J.: Freebase: a collabo-
ratively created graph database for structuring human knowledge. In: Proceedings
of the 2008 ACM SIGMOD international conference on Management of data. pp.
1247–1250. AcM (2008)

4. Adomavicius, G., Tuzhilin, A.: Toward the next generation of recommender sys-
tems: A survey of the state-of-the-art and possible extensions. IEEE Transactions
on Knowledge & Data Engineering (6), 734–749 (2005)

5. Mohirta, M., Cernian, A., Carstoiu, D., Vladu, A.M., Olteanu, A., Sgarciu, V.: A
semantic Web based scientiﬁc news aggregator. In: Applied Computational Intel-
ligence and Informatics (SACI), 2011 6th IEEE International Symposium on. pp.
285–289. IEEE (2011)

6. Gandon, F., Governatori, G., Villata, S.: Normative Requirements as Linked Data.
In: The 30th international conference on Legal Knowledge and Information Systems
(JURIX 2017) (2017)

7. Benslimane, D., Sheng, Q.Z., Barhamgi, M., Prade, H.: The uncertain Web: Con-
cepts, challenges, and current solutions. ACM Transactions on Internet Technology
(TOIT) 16(1), 1 (2016)

14

A. Djebri et al.

8. Dubois, D., Prade, H.: Formal representations of uncertainty. Decision-Making

Process: Concepts and Methods pp. 85–156 (2009)

9. Klir, G.J., Smith, R.M.: On measuring uncertainty and uncertainty-based infor-
mation: recent developments. Annals of Mathematics and Artiﬁcial Intelligence
32(1-4), 5–33 (2001)

10. Laskey, K.J., Laskey, K.B.: Uncertainty Reasoning for the World Wide Web: Re-

port on the URW3-XG Incubator Group. In: URSW. Citeseer (2008)

11. Reynolds, D.: Uncertainty reasoning for linked data. In: Proceedings of the Fifth
International Conference on Uncertainty Reasoning for the Semantic Web-Volume
527. pp. 85–88. CEUR-WS. org (2009)

12. Hayes, P.: RDF semantics, W3C recommendation. http://www. w3. org/TR/rdf-

mt/ (2004)

13. McGlothlin, J.P., Khan, L.R.: Materializing and Persisting Inferred and Uncertain

Knowledge in RDF Datasets. In: AAAI. vol. 10, pp. 11–15 (2010)

14. d’Amato, C., Bryl, V., Seraﬁni, L.: Semantic Knowledge Discovery and Data-
Driven Logical Reasoning from Heterogeneous Data Sources. In: Uncertainty Rea-
soning for the Semantic Web III, pp. 163–183. Springer (2014)

15. Ding, Z., Peng, Y., Pan, R.: BayesOWL: Uncertainty modeling in semantic web
ontologies. In: Soft computing in ontologies and semantic web, pp. 3–29. Springer
(2006)

16. Stoilos, G., Stamou, G.B., Tzouvaras, V., Pan, J.Z., Horrocks, I.: Fuzzy OWL:

Uncertainty and the Semantic Web. In: OWLED (2005)

17. Saﬁa, B.B., Aicha, M.: Poss-OWL 2: Possibilistic Extension of OWL 2 for an
uncertain geographic ontology. Procedia Computer Science 35, 407–416 (2014)
18. Dividino, R., Sizov, S., Staab, S., Schueler, B.: Querying for provenance, trust,
uncertainty and other meta knowledge in RDF. Web Semantics: Science, Services
and Agents on the World Wide Web 7(3), 204–219 (2009)

19. Bouquet, P., Seraﬁni, L., Stoermer, H.: Introducing Context into RDF Knowledge

Bases. In: SWAP. vol. 5, pp. 14–16 (2005)

20. Carroll, J.J., Bizer, C., Hayes, P., Stickler, P.: Named graphs, provenance and
trust. In: Proceedings of the 14th international conference on World Wide Web.
pp. 613–622. ACM (2005)

21. Consortium, W.W.W., et al.: RDF 1.1 concepts and abstract syntax (2014)
22. Brickley, D., Guha, R.V., McBride, B.: RDF Schema 1.1. W3C recommendation

25, 2004–2014 (2014)

23. Corby, O., Faron-Zucker, C.: RDF/SPARQL Design Pattern for Contextual Meta-
data. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/WIC/ACM International Conference on Web
Intelligence. pp. 470–473. WI ’07, IEEE Computer Society, Washington, DC, USA
(2007)

24. Corby, O., Faron-Zucker, C., Gandon, F.: LDScript: a Linked Data Script Lan-
guage. In: International Semantic Web Conference. pp. 208–224. Springer (2017)
25. Bizer, C., Lehmann, J., Kobilarov, G., Auer, S., Becker, C., Cyganiak, R., Hell-
mann, S.: DBpedia-A crystallization point for the Web of Data. Web Semantics:
science, services and agents on the world wide web 7(3), 154–165 (2009)

26. Cabrio, E., Villata, S., Gandon, F.: Classifying Inconsistencies in DBpedia Lan-

guage Speciﬁc Chapters. In: LREC. pp. 1443–1450 (2014)

27. Klir, G., Yuan, B.: Fuzzy sets and fuzzy logic, vol. 4. Prentice hall New Jersey

(1995)

28. da Costa Pereira, C., Dubois, D., Prade, H., Tettamanzi, A.G.: Handling Topical
Metadata Regarding the Validity and Completeness of Multiple-Source Informa-

Publishing Uncertainty on the Semantic Web: Blurring the LOD bubbles

15

tion: A Possibilistic Approach. In: International Conference on Scalable Uncer-
tainty Management. pp. 363–376. Springer (2017)

29. Corby, O., Zucker, C.F.: Corese: A corporate semantic web engine. In: Interna-
tional Workshop on Real World RDF and Semantic Web Applications, Interna-
tional World Wide Web Conference (2002)

30. Cabrio, E., Villata, S., Palmero Aprosio, A.: A RADAR for information reconcil-
iation in Question Answering systems over Linked Data 1. Semantic Web 8(4),
601–617 (2017)

