Learning and Reasoning for Cultural Metadata Quality
Anna Bobasheva, Fabien Gandon, Frédéric Precioso

To cite this version:

Anna Bobasheva, Fabien Gandon, Frédéric Precioso. Learning and Reasoning for Cultural Metadata
Quality. Journal on Computing and Cultural Heritage, 2022, 15 (3), ￿10.1145/3485844￿. ￿hal-03363442￿

HAL Id: hal-03363442

https://hal.science/hal-03363442

Submitted on 4 Oct 2021

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

Learning and Reasoning for Cultural Metadata Quality  
Coupling symbolic AI and Machine Learning over a semantic Web knowledge graph to support museum 
curators in improving the quality of cultural metadata and information retrieval 

ANNA, BOBASHEVA1 

Université Côte d’Azur, Inria, CNRS, I3S, France 

FABIEN, GANDON 

Université Côte d’Azur, Inria, CNRS, I3S, France 

FREDERIC, PRECIOSO 

Université Côte d’Azur, CNRS, Inria, I3S, France 

This work combines semantic reasoning and machine learning to create tools that allow curators of the visual art collections 

to identify and correct the annotations of the artwork as well as to improve the relevance of the content-based search results 
in these collections. The research is based on the Joconde database maintained by French Ministry of Culture that contains 
illustrated artwork records from main French public and private museums representing archeological objects, decorative arts, 

fine  arts,  historical  and  scientific  documents,  etc.  The  Joconde  database  includes  semantic  metadata  that  describes 
properties of the artworks and their content. The developed methods create a data pipeline that processes metadata, trains 
a  Convolutional  Neural  Network  image  classification  model,  makes  prediction  for  the  entire  collection  and  expands  the 

metadata to be the base for the SPARQL search queries. We developed a set of such queries to identify noise and silence 
in the human annotations and to search image content with results ranked according to the relevance of the objects quantified 
by  the  prediction  score  provided  by  the  deep  learning  model.  We  also  developed  methods  to  discover  new  contextual 

relationships  between  the  concepts  in  the  metadata  by  analyzing  the  contrast  between  the  concepts  similarities  in  the 
Joconde’s semantic model and other vocabularies and we tried to improve the model prediction scores based on the semantic 
relations. Our results show that cross-fertilization between symbolic AI and machine learning can indeed provide the tools to 

address the challenges of the museum curators work describing the artwork pieces and searching for the relevant images. 

CSS CONCEPTS • Information systems~World Wide Web~Web data description languages~Semantic 

web  description 
approaches • Computing methodologies~Artificial intelligence  

languages  •  Computing  methodologies~Machine 

learning~Machine 

learning 

Additional Keywords and Phrases: machine learning, image recognition, semantic Web, knowledge graph 

ACM Reference Format: 

Anna Bobasheva, Fabien Gandon, and Frederic Precioso. 2021. Learning and Reasoning for Cultural Metadata Quality.  

1.  INTRODUCTION 

The value for cultural institutions lies not only in their collections but also in the knowledge extracted by curators 
from  the  artwork  pieces  in  these collections.  However,  each  artwork piece  is  peculiar  by  its  content,  by  the 

material used, and by its style, thus the knowledge extracted for each piece has to be very precise and technical. 

1556-4673/2021/12 - ArticleNumber $15.00 
© Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3485844. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                  
This increases the difficulty to define a common knowledge representation for an entire artwork collection and 
leads to incomplete metadata or non-uniform metadata due to the variations of annotations between several 

curators. In order to retrieve information in the collections, cultural institutions have put a lot of effort in the last 
two  decades  to  design  Content-Based  Information  Retrieval  (CBIR)  systems.  However,  these  CBIR  search 

engines were exploiting the latest advances of the time on visual content classification and on metadata text 
analysis. An example of the metadata considered at the time was the filenames or topics from the visual content. 

If some metadata were erroneous or missing, CBIR systems were not able to detect it as they were relying a 
lot on the quality of the annotation data. As far as we know, none of the systems so far were combining visual 

information retrieval with semantic analysis and reasoning on the metadata. The only initiative considering both 
views was the CLAROS project [32] but visual content and semantic web data were exploited independently by 

different  components  and  not  jointly  to  correct  or  refine  the  content.  Moreover,  such  systems  were  mostly 
designed to  provide new tools for cultural heritage content exploration by a  large  audience and non-experts 

rather than to support curators in refining and maintaining the knowledge associated with the collections. 

French Ministry of Culture has a long-standing interest in the development of a reliable automated search 

system where artworks (e.g., paintings, sculptures) could be searched by the topics or objects represented in 
the image. For example, find all images with a horse in them. Currently, as illustrated on the Figure 1 the top 3 

search results for the term cheval (horse) are the images where a horse is either on the background or partially 
visible  and  not  a  major  subject  of the artwork.  Considering  the  number  of  artifacts  to  be  annotated  and  the 

complexity  of  image  analysis,  not  all  of  the  museums  have  been  able  to  describe  the  objects  depicted  with 
precision.  Querying  the  images  using  text  search  on  descriptors  is  not  straightforward  and  can  produce  a 

number of non-relevant results or miss very relevant ones. Additionally, the existing metadata describing the 
art  objects  can  be noisy  or  incomplete.  The  MonaLIA  project  was  initiated  to  improve  the  accuracy  and  the 

details of the artwork metadata and thus support the expert work of the curators, through cross-fertilization of 
recent advances in fine-grained object recognition and semantic Web annotation. 

Specifically,  our  research  aims  to  assess  whether  the  coupling  of  machine  learning  approaches  with 
knowledge representation and reasoning approaches (Semantic Web and linked data) has the potential to (1) 

enhance  metadata,  (2)  automate  or  semi-automate  artwork  annotation,  (3)  rank  search  results  by  visual 
relevance of a search criteria, (4) and assess the usability of an existing thesaurus for the latest AI methods. 

To evaluate these questions, we experiment with the Joconde database23 maintained by French Ministry of 
Culture that contains over 400,000 illustrated artwork records from main French public and private museums 

representing  archeological  objects,  decorative  arts,  fine  arts,  historical  and  scientific  documents,  etc.  The 
Joconde database includes semantic metadata built in the preceding project JocondeLab4 [16, 17] developed 
by  the  Research  and  Innovation  Institute  (IRI).  The  iconographic  description  metadata  was  formalized  in 
Semantic Web [14] formalism and by linking these annotations to the iconographic Garnier Thesaurus [15] and 

DBpedia.fr for describing the image. 

The  rest  of  the  paper  is  organized  as  follows:  in  Section  2  we  survey  the  related  works  in  terms  of  AI 

approaches  to  improve  the quality  and  search  in  cultural  collections  and  image  collections.  In  Section  3  we 
present the dataset, data processing pipeline and model selection process as well as the overall architecture 

2 http://www2.culture.gouv.fr/documentation/joconde/fr/pres.htm 
3 http://www2.culture.gouv.fr/documentation/joconde/fr/mentions_legales.htm 
4 http://jocondelab.iri-research.org/jocondelab 

2 

 
 
 
                                                  
we designed to combine knowledge representation methods and machine learning methods in the management 
of  a  single  dataset  documenting  a  large  cultural  collection.  Then  in  Section  4  we  describe  our  approach  in 

detection  of  the  silence  and  noise  and  in  ranking  the  content-based  search  results  by  visual  relevance.  In 
Section 5 we describe our approach for discovering missing semantic relations by contrasting the vocabularies 

and statistics of metadata. Finally, we conclude with a discussion of possible future work.  

Figure 1: Search result for the images of cheval (horse) in the Joconde database on the Open Heritage Platform (POP: la 
plateforme ouverte du patrimoine) maintained by the French Ministry of Culture. 

2.  RELATED WORK 

As  aforementioned  several  search  engines  have  been  designed  in  the  last  two  decades  to  explore  cultural 
heritage databases, but all these solutions were either focusing on visual content analysis (just to name a few 

among  many  works,  M4ART  [37],  Retin-3D  [34],  CB3DR  [35]),  or  on  semantic  web  data  analysis  (e.g. 
Europeana [33], MultimediaN E-Culture demonstrator [36]), and none of them were considering these two views 

of the content. CLAROS Project was offering to search in a database either based on knowledge representation 

or based on visual content but not jointly. Furthermore, most of these works have been proposed before the 

advent of Deep Learning (DL), which revolutionized visual content analysis. 

Majority of methodological studies that use DL for image classification are conducted on standard datasets 
such as ImageNet5 [1] and MS COCO6 [2]. Real-world domain datasets popular in image classification are from 
biology or medicine [3, 4]. A few studies were conducted on real-world visual art images [5, 6]. Several articles 

have discussed the problem of art style, genre, artist and art period recognition in visual arts using CNN models 
[7, 8, 9] on emerging art images datasets such as the one included in WikiData [7] or the one of the Web Gallery 
of Art7 (WGA) [10]. Many applications of these neural networks and transfer learning were published over the 
years  and  span  over  different  domain-specific  datasets  [25,  26,  27,  28].  The  advantages  of  using  standard 

datasets  include  verified  labelling  [1,  2]  and  depiction  of  prominent  objects  captured  in  photographs.  In  the 

5 http://www.image-net.org/  
6 https://cocodataset.org/#home 
7 http://www.wikiart.org/  

3 

 
 
 
 
                                                 
analysis of biomedical datasets, the objective is often to detect a specific category (class, label) with the highest 
accuracy [4] rather than detection of multiple often unrelated concepts. For such studies, binary and multi-class 

classification is common [3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9]. Art images typically have rich content with simultaneous occurrence 
of multiple visually relevant objects, e.g., horses, dogs, and soldiers all identifiable on a single painting.  

Combining semantic reasoning and deep learning has recently become a focus of interest to try to match 
the implicit knowledge captured by deep networks from data with the explicit organization of known concepts in 

knowledge representation of these same data. This interest spreads between domain specific areas such as 
medicine [49, 50], and more general research [51, 52, 53]. 

Most of the works in this direction have only focused on very direct and basic knowledge relations such as 
subClassOf or relations between labels [39, 40, 41]. In [38], Castellano et al use convolutional neural networks 

to  extract  visual  content  representation  of  paintings.  Then  they  build  a  graph  between  artists  through  a 
knowledge discovery process based on the visual similarity of the artworks in the feature space. This allows 

them to propose a new way for exploring influences between painters. However, their knowledge graph is built 
upon feature space similarities without any link to any knowledge base of the artworks, painters, style, etc. They 

infer possible painter relations from visual feature space similarities but do not reason on the knowledge they 
discover by relating it with confirmed knowledge from Wikipedia or other knowledge bases. 

In  our  work,  we  combine  two  technologies:  Deep  Learning  from  images  and  Semantic  Reasoning  from 
structured metadata applied to visual art. We explore state-of-the-art CNN models: VGG [12] and Inception v3 
[13],  in  a  transfer  learning  context.  Among  the  multiple  Semantic  Web  development  tools8  for  this  project’s 
semantic reasoning we chose CORESE9 (Conceptual Resource Search Engine) for its ability to process RDF, 
RDFS,  OWL  SPARQL  1.1  (query  and  update)  and  for  its  extensions  of  the  standards  including  rules  and 
semantic distances [29]. Its standalone interface and the in-memory implementation also helped us test and 

prototype several queries and manipulations we will mention later. 

The  problem  of  quality  of  the  metadata  is  closely  related  to  data  quality  in  general  has  been  addressed 

before. However, some works are focused on RDF datasets and ontologies in general [20] or consistency of 
the SKOS-specific properties [21]. These works focus on quality problems with regards to the metadata models 

(RDFS, OWL, SKOS) and the linked data principles but not on domain-dependent quality checks. 

Ontology-based image retrieval solutions have been proposed before [22, 23, 24]. These works have proven 

that  with  ontology-based  annotations  images  can  be  found  more  accurately.  However,  the  proposed 
approaches either employ the semantic reasoning only [22, 24] or while introducing image classifiers into the 

process do not utilize the Deep Learning models [23]. These contributions leverage semantics in improving the 
search results, for instance by adding results obtained with the transitive closure of the subtype or sub-concept 

hierarchy. In our project, we have a unique real-world dataset of visual art images and extensive structured but 
imperfect metadata that allows us to explore the combination of semantic reasoning and image recognition in 

order to improve both the semantic annotation and content-based image retrieval, and support curators’ work. 

8 https://www.w3.org/2001/sw/wiki/Tools  
9 https://project.inria.fr/corese/ 

4 

 
 
 
                                                  
3.  INTEGRATION OF SEMANTIC AND LEARNING PROCESSING OF CULTURAL LINKED DATA 

We now detail the dataset, data processing pipeline, model selection process and the overall architecture we 
designed to combine knowledge representation and machine learning methods in the management of a single 

dataset documenting a large cultural collection. This is the keystone of our work as it enables us to combine 
and contrast results from reasoning on the symbolic metadata (RDF, SKOS) and learning on the sub-symbolic 

data (images) as detailed in sections 4 and 5 of this article. 

3.1 The dataset 

A snapshot of  the  Joconde database  (Joconde dataset) was  extracted for  us  in 2018.  The  dataset  contains 
artwork records metadata and thesauri (Joconde KB) as well as the collection of image files. The metadata is 
represented in the RDF10 format and images are JPEG files of different sizes and resolutions.  

Joconde metadata is based on the ontology developed in the preceding project JocondeLab11 and defined 
in a dedicated namespace12. The ontology defines 76 properties of the artwork. Most of the properties describe 
the artwork itself such as title, author, museum, etc., and 2 properties describe what is depicted by the artwork. 

The dataset contains 483,297 artwork records. 59% (285144) of them have associated images. 56% (165800) 
of the images have the content annotations. In terms of coverage, 37% of the properties defined in the ontology 

(28) are filled over 75% of the collection and 46% (35) are filled under 25% of the collection. 

One particular property sujet représenté (represented subject) describes the content of the image and has 

a  zero-to-many  cardinality.  The  values  of  this  property  are  based  on  the  specific  iconographic  thesaurus 
developed by François Garnier published in 1984 [15]. The values of the sujet représenté (represented subject) 

property  are  especially  interesting  for  our  work  because  they  can  be  considered  as  labels  for  the  image 
classification  model  training.  The  sujet  représenté  (represented  subject)  concepts  (REPR  thesaurus)  are 

organized in hierarchies with 12 roots. Among all of the 32274 unique REPR concepts, only 70% (22552) are 
associated with the artwork images, 37% (12013) are not named entities, and 2.4% (790) are associated with 

more than 200 images. One research question in the MonaLIA project was the quality and suitability of this old 
thesaurus for the latest AI methods relying on reasoning and learning. For instance, we can notice upfront that 

the roots of the hierarchies may not have the same abstraction level from one sub-hierarchy to another. As a 
concrete example, the concept cheval (horse) is 8 edges removed from the root concept la nature (nature) while 

the  other  concept  bateau  (boat)  is  4  edges  removed  from  the  root  concept  transport-communications.  The 
deepest branches are 11 edges removed from the root. The modelling and conceptualization choices and more 

generally the ontological and formalization commitment made in the ontology, the thesaurus and DBpedia may 
have a strong impact on the efficiency of AI approaches especially when then have not been designed with that 

purpose in mind and when they are reused from other application scenarios. 

In order to scope and ground our evaluation, the French Ministry of Culture has also provided a list of 102 

most  searched  concepts.  Inspired  by  Large  Scale  Visual  Recognition  Challenge  (ILSVRC)  practices  and 
conducting  our  own  experiments  we  have  concluded  that  ~1000  would  be  enough  images  containing  a 

representation of a concept to train the DL algorithm. Unfortunately, and for natural reasons only 40 out of 102 

10 https://www.w3.org/RDF 
11 http://jocondelab.iri-research.org/jocondelab 
12 http://jocondelab.iri-research.org/ns/jocondelab/ 

5 

 
 
 
                                                  
concepts of interest have enough images in our dataset. In Table S5 in the Supplementary materials we provide 
a summary of the concepts with concepts having enough images in bold. 

3.2 Data enrichment workflow with an RDF triplestore as a pivot 

As mentioned above the original Joconde dataset metadata is stored in a type of database specific to RDF 
data called triplestore. Triplestores provide a mechanism for the storage and retrieval of RDF graphs through 

semantic queries and may support other types of intelligent processing including inferences and validation for 
instance.  Our  proposition  is  to  extend  this  dataset  with  the  results  of  image  classification  and  of  semantic 

reasoning by relying on the triplestore as an integration point. In order to accomplish this, we develop two-pass 
dataflow for training and for scoring. For the training pass, we query the triplestore using the SPARQL language  
13 to create the labeled image set for training, validation, and testing. The images and labels are selected based 
on criteria discussed in sections 3.3 and 4.1. Then we fine-tune the CNN model described in sections 3.4 and 

4.2 on the training and validation sets and test to assess the model performance on the test set. 

For the scoring pass we query again but this time with different constraints to create a dataset that we run 

through the fine-tuned model and obtain prediction scores for every classification category for every image as 
described in section 4.3 and we create new triples associating the image with prediction scores, the results are 

represented in RDF and are stored back in the triplestore (see example in section 4.3) to be integrated and put 
in  use  with all  the other metadata. As a result, we  created an extended triplestore database that allows the 

ontology-based image search with quantified relevance of the search term. On top of this pipeline, we can then 
perform analytics queries leveraging all the annotations gathered and obtained and their semantics. We first 

designed SPARQL queries to look for the anomalies in the annotations such as noise and silence or to search 
for a term with better ranked results as discussed in section 4.4. 

Figure 2: Data processing pipeline. 

13 https://www.w3.org/TR/sparql11-overview/  

6 

 
 
 
 
                                                 
In addition, a Semantic Web triplestore provides the ability to evaluate quickly the impact of changes in the 

semantic models on the results of the entire pipeline. 

For  instance,  in  the  early  experiments,  we  discovered  that  humans  on  the  images  were  not  necessarily 
annotated by the concepts in the être humain (human being) hierarchy of the Garnier Thesaurus [15] and that 

led to a poor CNN model performance in identifying humans and animals. As shown in the examples in Table 
1, on the first row’s image the human is represented by concepts soldat (soldier) and cavalier (horseman) that 

are not sub-concepts of the être humain (human being) concept in the thesaurus. Also, in many instances where 
the cavalier (horseman) concept is present in the annotation the concept cheval (horse) is omitted like in the 

example on the second row. 

Table 1: Examples of images and sujet représenté (represented subject) property annotation where some of the annotation 
concepts are missing. 

Image 

Property sujet représenté (represented subject) 

figure (Révolution française de 1848, soldat, cavalier, cheval, uniforme) 
 (figure (French Revolution of 1848, soldier, horseman, horse, uniform)) 

scène (chasseur, cavalier, bouffon,chien) 
(scene (hunter, rider, jester, dog)) 

To address this issue, we apply rules to create new RDF triples (Code 1) to link the concepts that are not in 

the  same  hierarchies  but  should  be  related  to  our  tasks  (search,  training,  etc.).  To  follow  our  example  on 
horsemen and soldiers, we added a rule that generates RDF triple to connect the être humain (human being) 

concepts as a parent with hiérarchie militaire (military hierarchy) as a child which transitively connects the soldat 
(soldier), guerrier (warrior), chef militaire (military commander), etc. with être humain (human being).  

This declarative approach and the automatic reasoning that it triggers (transitive propagation following the 
hierarchies) proved to be a very simple and useful technique for improving the labeling of the training and testing 

datasets and impact the learning performance. 

CODE 1: Extract of SPARQL Query to insert new triples to the triplestore and create missing links in the thesaurus 

insert { ?x skos:related ?y } 

where {?x skos:prefLabel "cheval"@fr.      ?y skos:prefLabel "cavalier“@fr.} 

Creating new relations between the concepts that are semantically and/or visually related but do not exist in 

the Garnier Thesaurus benefit the model training datasets thus creating classifiers that are more accurate.  

In the example in Table 2 the second image metadata is missing the term cheval (horse) but with the link 
between the concepts cavalier (horseman) and cheval (horse) the image is properly labeled like the first image 

3.3 Deep Learning Model 

As  aforementioned,  Deep  Learning  models  have  revolutionized  data  analysis  and  in particular for  computer 
vision  problems  such  as  image  classification  or  object  detection,  but  they  require  a  very  large  training  set. 

7 

 
 
 
 
 
Thanks to the huge number of labelled images in ImageNet dataset, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) are 
thus  able  to  learn  very  efficient  visual  content  representation  outperforming  all  previously  existing  methods, 

even outperforming Humans, to classify images [42]. The second reason for their impact lies in their Transfer 
Learning capabilities. Indeed, Transfer Learning allows using a CNN that was developed and trained to solve a 

given problem (e.g., image classification of ImageNet dataset), to solve another but related problem (e.g., image 
classification of Joconde dataset) [43, 44]. The most important aspect of this capability is to be able then to 

benefit from a model trained on a large amount of data (usually ImageNet), then to refine or even just to use it 
as is for a task with few training samples [45, 46, 47]. In [48], Tan et al exploit this capability to classify images 

from Cultural Heritage datasets where few data are available and consequently very few training data. 

Table 2: Example of the effect of the data link on the labeling. 

Image 

Labels & Metadata 

cavalier (horseman)  
cheval (horse) 

figures (cavalier, homme, cheval) 
(figures (rider, man, horse)) 

50440004334 

cavalier (horseman)  
cheval (horse) 
chien (dog) 

scène (chasseur, cavalier, bouffon, chien) 
 (scene (hunter, rider, jester, dog)) 

02110007092 

Prediction 

cheval (horse) : 0.790 
cavalier (horseman) : 0.097 
voiture à attelage(tow car) : 0.051 
chien(dog) : 0.010 
de profil (sideways) : 0.006 
mouton(sheep) : 0.005 
nu(nude) : 0.004 
draperie (drapery) : 0.004 
épée(sword) : 0.003 
casque (helmet) : 0.003 

cavalier (horseman) : 0.557 
cheval (horse: 0.376 
voiture à attelage(tow car) : 0.033 
chien(dog): 0.012 
château (castle) : 0.003 
drapeau (flag) : 0.003 
maison(house) : 0.002 
arbre (tree) : 0.002 
casque (helmet) : 0.002 
nuage (cloud) : 0.002 

The  state-of-the-art  pre-trained  CNN  models  are  typically  trained  as  multi-class  classifiers.  In  multi-class 
classification,  a  sample  can  be  classified  into  one  category  among  many.  In  an  image  set,  one  image  is 

classified to most likely represent one of the objects from the set of multiple objects. However, the significant 
number of images in the Joconde dataset represent multiple objects of interest. This calls for building a multi-

label classifier where a sample can be classified as a set of classes mutually non-exclusive.  

At  first,  we  have  employed  transfer  learning  from  ImageNet  training  and  then  adapted  to  a  multi-label 

classification by using a one-hot label encoding, a sigmoid function as output layer, and Binary Cross Entropy 
Loss function. To find the best performing solution for the Joconde multi-label classification we evaluated two 

state of the art multi class CNNs, VGG16 with batch normalization and Inception v3. Comparison details can 
be found in Table S1 of Supplementary materials.  

The performance of these two models on the Joconde dataset is compatible while the Inception v3 is slightly 
faster to train and has 35 times less parameters, thus saving time and  disk space. Therefore, we chose the 

Inception v3 model for further investigation. We have optimized other hyperparameters, such as initial learning 
rate, learning rate decay, optimizer algorithm and dropout rate.  

8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Eventual training setup for a multi-label model: architecture: Inception v3, training mode: fine-tuning, dropout 
rate: 0.5, activation function: Sigmoid, loss function: Binary Cross Entropy, optimizer: Adam, initial learning rate: 

0.001, training epochs: 20, momentum: 0.9. 

3.4 Image Preprocessing for CNN consumption 

The  state-of-the-art  CNN  image  classifiers  take  only  the  square  images  as  an  input.  The  Joconde  artwork 

images have a wide distribution of sizes. Unfortunately, not too many square images (0.2% of all images are 
perfectly square, 3% are within 5% of being square). To deal with the non-square images we have tried several 

approaches.  Filtering  out  “wide”  and  “tall”  images,  padding  images  to  square,  scaling  and  multi-cropping. 
Restricting the image set by a certain image aspect ratio may improve the training set and subsequently model 

performance. Empirically we found the optimal maximum for Joconde database AR = 1.2. This aspect ratio puts 
a serious constraint on the number of available images and the more realistic one is 1.4. Restricting the aspect 

ratio  of  the  training  set  generally  improved  the  performance  of  the  classifier  but,  at  the  same  time,  put  a 
constraint on the number of available images per concept. Other techniques such as padding, scaling and multi-

cropping did not substantially improve model performance. 

Table 3: Performance comparison for different limits on aspect ratio of the images. The experimental data: a set of images 
disjointly annotated with concepts animal and être humain (human being). The experimental model: Inception v3. 

Aspect Ratio 

Not restricted 

F1 (macro avg) 

0.77 

<=2.0 

0.84 

<=1.4 

0.85 

<=1.2 

0.92 

In the preliminary studies the analysis of the other contributing factors on the classification results uncovered 

that the images of the ceramic arts are out of the distribution of the other images fooling the model and leading 
to a bad training. Not including this group of images into the dataset improved the performance metrics of the 

model up to 6%. Thus, going forward we explicitly removed the ceramic arts from the dataset, and we plan in 
the future to have a specific processing for this form of art. This shows another benefit of considering metadata 

to adapt models for very specific subsets of data. 

As the results of the semantic integration of symbolic and learning processing of cultural linked data and the 

pre-processing performed in this first stage, we obtained a fully operational framework to start designing and 
evaluating methods supporting the life cycle of the data of a cultural collection and their use in search engines. 

4.  CHASING NOISE AND SILENCE IN METADATA AND PROVIDING RANKING TO IMPROVE SEARCH 

IN THE COLLECTION 

The MonaLIA approach, we now propose, to improve search and metadata can be described in 4 phases: (1) 

we create training and test subsets images using SPARQL queries on metadata to  label the images; (2) we 
fine-tune  multi-label  CNN  classifier  on  the  training  set  and  evaluate  its  performance  on  the  test  set;  (3)  we 

perform prediction on the entire Joconde dataset using the trained CNN model to extend image metadata with 
prediction scores of classes; and (4) we perform analytical SPARQL queries on extended metadata to improve 

search and to chase noise and silence. As the framework of queries and model training software was developed, 
we gradually scaled the classifier up to 10, 20, 40 classes.  

9 

 
 
 
4.1 Creating training and test subsets images using SPARQL queries on metadata to label the images.  

To train a CNN image classifier the labeled dataset has to be prepared. In our case, the labels correspond to 
the objects that the classifier is intended to identify. Therefore, in order to prepare the dataset, we need to select 

the images that contain the objects from the object list and build a subset of data containing image references 
and their metadata; we call it the image set. The selection is based on the sujet représenté (represented subject) 

property  of  the  JocondeLab  ontology  (RDF  properties  jcl:noticeRepr,  jcl:noticeReprTerm).  These  attributes 
contain  the  reference  to  the  entities  organized  in  a  hierarchy  according  to  the  Thesaurus  Iconographique 

published by François Garnier in 1984 [15]. 

For a successful model, the training image set must be balanced and large enough. From the Large-Scale 

Visual Recognition Challenge (ILSVRC) we know that the networks can be trained on 1000 images pre class. 
Also,  the  MonaLIA  preliminary  study  had  shown  that  1000  is  enough  artworks  images  to  fine-tune  the  pre-

trained model. We also need a fraction of the images for the validation and testing.  

For the training set preparation, a generic SPARQL query was developed to: (1) take an arbitrary concept 

list as an input; (2) select the artwork data records with references to the listed objects and their descendants 
in the hierarchy (3) take into account an optional list of exclusions of descendants that can be specified as an 

input in order to add flexibility in choosing the sub-concepts. 

Query results are processed further to filter the records as discussed in section 3.4, make a stratified split to 

3 sets for training validation and testing and save the processed result to a file to be consumed by the data 
loader  for  the  classification  step.  In  order  to avoid copying  the  images  to  the  traditional  arrangement  of  the 

image datasets based on the older structure, we developed a customized data loader that loads the data from 
the Joconde image file structure provided by the Ministry of Culture. 

In the multi-labeled datasets, it is very hard to balance the number of images representing each concept 
and each combination of the concepts increases exponentially with the increase of number of concepts (2C – 
1, where C is the number of concepts). 

We developed a simplified method of selecting images for a training set: (a) Select all the images from the 

Joconde database containing the concepts as a jcl:noticeReprTerm property. (b) Filter out the images with more 
than 5 concepts from the concept list. (c) Filter out images with extremely high aspect ratio (>5). (d) Filter out 

the images of ceramics artworks. (e) Select 1000 images of each concept represented alone. (f) Select all the 
combinations  of  each  concept  with  other  concepts.  The  last  step  creates  an  unbalance  that  must  be 

compensated by calculating the positive weights for each concept when calculating the loss function. Positive 
weights are the weights of the positive sample of the Binary Cross Entropy loss function, pc in formula (1)14.  

(cid:3021)
𝐿𝑐 =   (cid:3419)𝑙(cid:2869),(cid:3030), … , 𝑙(cid:3015),(cid:3030)(cid:3423)

, 𝑙(cid:3041),(cid:3030) =   −𝑤(cid:3041),(cid:3030)[𝑝(cid:3030)𝑦(cid:3041),(cid:3030) ∗ 𝑙𝑜𝑔 𝜎(cid:3435)𝑥(cid:3041),(cid:3030)(cid:3439) +   (1 − 𝑦(cid:3041),(cid:3030)) ∗ 𝑙𝑜𝑔 (1 − 𝜎(cid:3435)𝑥(cid:3041),(cid:3030)(cid:3439))]  (1) 

𝑝(cid:3030) =

(cid:3030)(cid:3042)(cid:3048)(cid:3041)(cid:3047)((cid:3051)(cid:3289),(cid:3278)(cid:2880)(cid:2880)(cid:2868))
(cid:3030)(cid:3042)(cid:3048)(cid:3041)(cid:3047)((cid:3051)(cid:3289),(cid:3278)(cid:2880)(cid:2880)(cid:2869))

   (2) 

Choosing  the  positive  weights  allows  us  to  trade  off  recall  and  precision  by  adding  weights  to  positive 

examples: pc > 1 increases the recall, pc < 1 increases the precision. We have chosen to increase the recall 
and calculate the pc as a ratio of negative to positive samples of the class (formula 2). 

14 https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/generated/torch.nn.BCEWithLogitsLoss.html#torch.nn.BCEWithLogitsLoss 

10 

 
 
 
 
                                                  
4.2 Fine-tune multi-label CNN classifier on training set and evaluate its performance on test set. 

In  the  preliminary  study,  we  focused  on  building  and  assessing  multi-class  classifiers.  For  multi-class,  the 
predicted answer is the class with the highest predicted score. For multi-label classification problems, the score 

threshold must be chosen to make predictions and the predicted answer is a set of classes with scores higher 
than the threshold(s). To make sure that the transfer learning and adaptation of the multi-class to multi-label 

works a set of validation runs were made on both ImageNet and Joconde images. 

To evaluate model performance for multi-label classification we use F1 score (macro average formula 3) and 

mean  Average  Precision  (mAP  formula  5).  The  first  metric  depends  on  the  choice  of  the  probability  score 
threshold and the second does not.  

𝐹1 =  

(cid:2869)

(cid:3004)

∑ 2  ∗  

(cid:3030)

(cid:3017)(cid:3278)∗ (cid:3019)(cid:3278)
(cid:3017)(cid:3278)∗(cid:2878)(cid:3019)(cid:3278) 

     (3)  

 𝐴𝑃 = ∑ (cid:3435)𝑅(cid:3041) −   𝑅{(cid:3041)(cid:2879)(cid:2869)}(cid:3439)𝑃(cid:3041)

(cid:3041)

      (4) 

 𝑚𝐴𝑃 =

(cid:2869)

(cid:3004)

 ∑ 𝐴𝑃(cid:3030)
(cid:3030)

      (5) 

Where Rn and Pn are the precision and recall at the n-th threshold and C is the number of concepts. 

To  improve  the  accuracy  of  the  classifier  (F1  metrics)  the  threshold  selection  is  important.  In  multi-label 
classification especially with growing numbers of classified concepts, the F1 metric decreases. To obtain better 

classification results we can vary the threshold to find an optimal recall/precision ratio.  

We  experimented  with  manual  threshold  validation  and  implemented  the  Proportion  Cut  (PCut)  [18,  31] 

method that can be label-wise or global that calibrates the threshold(s) from the training data globally or per 
label. Label-wise PCut sets different thresholds for each label, which guarantees that the predicted positive rate 

for this label is close to the training positive rate. The more concepts we try to recognize the more beneficial it 
is to use calculated label-wise thresholds. The manual validation and PCut threshold selection shows that the 

higher values for the threshold (≥0.80) yield the best results. 

We experimented with different number of target concepts increasing the number of classes in the outputs 

of the classifier. Table 4 summarizes the metrics of model performance for the different number of classes. The 
classes correspond to the list in the Table S1 in Supplementary materials. We have witnessed the performance 

degradation after the number of classes exceeds 40 because of the availability of training images. There is also 
an evidence that the  state-of-the-art  machine  learning  algorithm  does not work as well in  the domain  of the 

diverse visual art as it does with the collections consisting of the specifically chosen photographs.  

Table 4: Performance comparison for increasing number of classes. The experimental model was Inception v3. 

Number of classes  

Label-wise decision threshold range  

F1 (macro avg)  

mAP  

10  
20  
40  
50  
100  

0.80 - 0.90  
0.80 - 0.95  
0.80 - 0.95 
0.90 - 0.95  
0.90 - 0.95 

0.72 
0.61 
0.52 
0.46  
0.26 

 0.80 
 0.65 
 0.54 
 0.47 
 0.28 

4.3 Predict on the entire Joconde dataset with trained CNN model to extend image metadata with 

prediction scores of classes. 

By running  the model on all the  images of the Joconde dataset we  obtained the  prediction scores for  every 

image in the Joconde dataset and linked these scores with the artwork records by saving the scores in the same 
RDF format as the initial metadata using a vocabulary we designed for this purpose as shown in Code 2.  

11 

 
 
 
Applying the trained model to the entire Joconde database generates prediction scores for each concept for 
each image. We store these scores linking them with the artwork record. The association is made by creating 

RDF triples linking the jcl:Notice entity with scores. We also specify which classifier generates the scores so 
the result of multiple classifiers can be compared and/or used in the queries. 

As a result, the RDF triplestore contains all the initial data plus all the classification results and the analysis 
of these results can therefore leverage semantic Web reasoning and querying capabilities in the formulation of 

analytic queries. 

CODE 2: Extract of the prediction score represented in RDF and integrated to metadata. 

ml:classifierRepresentedSubject a rdfs:Class ; ml:vocabID "REPR" . 

ml:classifierTenClasses rdfs:label "10 classes" ; 

                        rdfs:comment "Classifier trained on images labeled..." ; 

                        rdfs:subClassOf ml:classifierRepresentedSubject . 

<https://jocondelab.iri-research.org/data/notice/00000055013>  

            ml:imageClassifier [ a ml:classifierTenClasses ; 

            ml:detected [ a t:T523-2744 ; ml:score "0.2535"^^xsd:float ], 

                        [ a t:T523-1740 ; ml:score "0.2075"^^xsd:float ], 

                        . . . 

                        [ a t:T523-1051 ; ml:score "0.1096"^^xsd:float ] ] . 

4.4 Analytic SPARQL queries on extended metadata to improve search and chase noise and silence.  

To support extended metadata search on depicted concepts we developed SPARQL queries that allow the user 

(museum curator) to obtain the lists of images filtered by search term and its prediction scores. If the prediction 
score is high but the term is not mentioned in the image representation description, then it is a sign of omission 

(silence) in the description. If the prediction score is very low and the term is mentioned in the description, then 
it might be a sign that this term in the description might not be necessary (noise). The SPARQL query can also 

simulate a keyword search and return the results sorted by prediction scores high to low which would rank the 
results according to the iconographic relevance due to the fact that CNN classifiers are better in recognizing of 

larger objects [38, 48]. 

Because the multi-label classifiers recognize more than one object represented on the image, ordering and 

ranking the objects also allows a curator of the collection to detect silence and noise of the annotation of the 
image.  In  Tables  S2-S4  in  Supplementary  materials  we  present  more  examples  of  the  artwork  image 

classification results and their impact on the quality of the information retrieval.  

In  Table  5  we  demonstrate  the  top  4 search  results  for  the  concept chien  (dog)  sorted  by  the  prediction 

scores  in  the  descending  order.  It  is  clear  that  the  deep  learning  model  performs  well  when  classifying  the 
visually  prominent  objects and  bringing  the  high  scored  images  on  the  top  of  the  list  serves the purpose  of 

ranking the result by relevance for a search engine or recommendation system. 

To compare, on Figure 3 we present the screenshot of the results of the same search criteria returned by 

text-based search algorithm that is currently deployed on the portal of the French Ministry of Culture. The text-

12 

 
 
 
based algorithm gives the higher rank to the results with titles that contain the search criteria, which may result 
in missing more relevant images if they are not properly named and annotated. 

Table 5: Top 4 results of the query for concept chien (dog) sorted by prediction scores in descending order. 

Image 

Joconde Metadata 

Prediction Score 

représentation animalière (chien) 
(animal representation (dog)) 

07480003359 

représentation animalière (tête, chien berger) 
(animal representation (head, shepherd dog)) 

01550001084 

représentation animalière (tête d'animal, chien) 
(animal representation (animal head, dog)) 

chien (dog): 1.0 

chien (dog): 1.0 

50130000049 

chien (dog): 1.0 

représentation animalière (chien) ; feuillu ; fleur 
(animal representation (dog); foliage; flower) 

00000074825 

chien (dog): 0.999 

Figure 3: Search result for the images of chien (dog) in the Joconde database on the Open Heritage Platforme (POP: la 
plateforme ouverte du patrimoine) maintained by the French Ministry of Culture 

13 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In Table 6 we present the sample of results of querying the extended metadata to detect the noise in the 
existing image annotations. In these examples the query searches for the images that have the concept cheval 
(horse) or related concept cavalier (horseman) but have low prediction scores (⩽ 0.20). On the first row there 
is no visible horse on the sculpture, on the second row the horseman is barely visible on the background, and 

on the third row the horse is small and, although it cannot be ignored, it should have a low significance. All these 
examples are cases where a curator may want to revise and adjust the metadata. 

Table 6: Examples of noise detection in the images that do not have a visually relevant term cheval (horse) with the 
prediction scores below 0.2. 

Image 

Joconde Metadata 

cheval (horse) 

 Prediction Scores 

figure (saint Eloi de Noyon, évêque, en pied, bénédiction, vêtement 
liturgique, mitre, attribut, cheval, marteau, outil : ferronnerie) 
(figure (Saint Eloi de Noyon, bishop, standing, blessing, liturgical 
vestment, mitre, attribute, horse, hammer, tool: ironwork)) 

cheval (horse): 0.006 

000SC022652 

cheval (horse) 
cavalier (horseman) 

figures bibliques (Vierge à l'Enfant, à mi-corps, assis, Enfant Jésus : 
nu, livre);fond de paysage (colline, cours d'eau, barque, cavalier) 
(biblical figures (Virgin and Child, half-body, seated, Child Jesus: 
nude, book);landscape background (hill, river, boat, horseman)) 

cheval (horse): 0.009 

000PE027041 

cheval (horse) 

scène (satirique : Bismarck Otto von : Gargantua, repas, cheval, 
boisson : vin) 
(scene (satire: Bismarck Otto von: Gargantua, meal, horse, drink: 
wine)) 

cheval (horse): 0.011 

5002E006121 

In Table 7 we present the results of querying the extended metadata to specifically detect the silence in the 
existing  image annotations.  In this case the query searches for the images  that  have  high prediction scores 
(⩾0.90) but no corresponding term in the metadata. In all three images the depiction of the cheval (horse) is 
prominent but the metadata is either very general (first and second rows) or has the indirect association with 

the horse through the concept équestre passant (horse riding). This method detects that the association is not 
captured in the thesaurus and could be an input for the linking method described in section 3.2 by providing 

candidate missing links for the thesaurus (e.g., horse - horse riding) and improving the results of the reasoning 
on the metadata.  

All the examples of this section and supplemental materials showed the impact of coupling reasoning and 
learning  on  symbolic  data  (RDF  annotations)  and  sub-symbolic  data  (images)  to  provide  new  means  of 

improving  search  results  and  data  quality,  in  particular  noise  and silence  detection.  To  extend  our  ability  to 
evaluate the quality of the metadata and their vocabulary, the next section will present a new set of metrics we 

proposed and experiments we performed. 

14 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 7: Examples of the silence detection for the concept cheval (horse) where the concept is visually relevant without 
corresponding concept in the existing annotation. 

Image 

Joconde Metadata 

Prediction Scores 

portrait 

50350012455 

cheval (horse): 0.999 

scène historique (guerre de siège : Lawfeld, Louis XV, Saxe 
maréchal de, bataille rangée) 
(historical scene (siege warfare: Lawfeld, Louis XV, Saxony 
marshal of, row battle)) 

cheval (horse): 0.999 

000PE004371 

figure (sainte Jeanne d'Arc, jeune fille, équestre passant, 
armure, casque, épée) 
(figure (Saint Joan of Arc, young girl, horse riding), armor, 
helmet, sword)) 

M0301000355 

cheval (horse): 0.997 

5.  DISCOVERING SEMANTIC RELATIONS CONTRASTING VOCABULARIES AND STATISTICS  

Inspired by the empirical discovery of “unlinked” relations and the effect on classification performance of adding 
them before the labelling algorithm we studied the part of Joconde dataset metadata that pertains to the context 

of the image. We were looking for automated ways to discover the concepts that have a semantic relationship 
but are not directly linked by the predefined thesaurus. For example, concept cavalier (horseman) and cheval 

(horse) are semantically and visually related but are not related in the Garnier Thesaurus. 

 The questions we asked were: (1) Are there other pairs of concepts that can be linked to improve image 

context annotations? (2) Can we find them by studying pairwise context co-occurrence and/or distance between 
them in the knowledge graph? (3) Can we find the missing links by accessing external vocabularies including 

the same concepts?  

In order to do this, we selected and evaluated several statistics and metrics on vocabularies both internal 

and external, and on the metadata of the cultural collection to identify pairs of concepts, which could be good 
candidates for introducing additional explicit links.  

In the process we also demonstrated the interest of studying the contrast between the concepts in Garnier 
Thesaurus  formalized  in  the  Joconde  dataset  and  the  graph  of  mapped  categories  extracted  from  the 

DBPedia.fr showing the impact, bias and potential evolutions for the reference vocabulary selected to ground 
the annotations of the cultural collection. 

5.1 Contrasting context similarity in image metadata with distance similarity in Garnier Thesaurus 

One of the first studies we conducted was to evaluate how different were the aspects captured by the actual 

annotations of the images and the one suggested by the Garnier Thesaurus, in particular in terms of relations 

15 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
made between the concepts. For this study, we chose the top 40 concepts that are most occurring in the image 
annotations among the 102 queries from the search engine provided by the French Ministry of Culture (Table 

S5  in  Supplemental  materials). We  defined  and  formalized  in  SPARQL  several  queries  to  obtain  the  graph 
distance between concept pairs in the Garnier Thesaurus as well as the co-occurrences of these concepts in 

human annotations and in Deep Learning model predictions. We then formulated a method and devised metrics 
to compare the results of these different queries and identify the most related pairs of concepts accordingly and 

the differences we found in the proximity we got for them through each source. Intuitively, these differences 
capture the gap between the conceptualization as represented in the thesaurus (the theory) and the effective 

relations made by usage in the annotations (the practice). 

The metric that we used for evaluating pairs’ co-occurrence is Tversky index when 𝛼=0, β=1 in Equation 6 

defines  Tversky  index  for  pairs  of  concepts  (A,  B)  where  A  and  B  are  the  sets  of  annotations  of  artworks 
respectively using concepts A and B in their descriptions. 

 𝑇𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑠𝑘𝑦 𝐼𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑥 =  

|(cid:3002)∩(cid:3003)|
|(cid:3002)∩(cid:3003)|(cid:2878)(cid:3080)|(cid:3002)(cid:2879)(cid:3003)|(cid:2878)(cid:3081)|(cid:3003)(cid:2879)(cid:3002)|

=  

|(cid:3002)∩(cid:3003)|
|(cid:3003)|

, (6) 

We use the asymmetric Tversky Index because it is useful for determining the concept relations by giving a 

hint of the possible direction of the relation between the concepts, i.e., one is broader/narrower than the other. 
Since  the  Joconde  REPR  thesaurus  is  structured  as  a  hierarchy  of  concepts  of  the  Garnier  Thesaurus 

(narrower/broader SKOS relations), this top-down tree structure can be leveraged in metrics for evaluating path 
distances between pairs of concepts. To capture the level of abstractions, the edges between a concept and its 
broader concepts are weighted by 2(cid:2879)(cid:3031) where d is the depth of a node from the top node. Intuitively, the lower 
we are in the hierarchy, the more concrete the concepts are and the less important the differences between 

them are. For instance, the difference between a human and a building are bigger than between a greyhound 
and a german shepherd which are much deeper in the hierarchy. The distance of a path between two nodes is 

the shortest distance across these weighted links between these two nodes through the hierarchy of concepts. 
This distance is formalized in Equation 8. A distance can be inverted to obtain a similarity as in Equation 9. 

𝑑𝑒𝑝𝑡ℎ(cid:3050)(𝑐) =  

(cid:3028)(cid:3435)(cid:2869)(cid:2879)(cid:3045)(cid:3279)((cid:3278))(cid:3126)(cid:3117)(cid:3439)
(cid:2869) – (cid:3045)

− 1, 

(7) 

where α=1, r=0.5, and d is the number of edges from the top 

𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒(cid:3050)(𝐴, 𝐵) = 𝑑𝑒𝑝𝑡ℎ(cid:3050)(𝐴) +   𝑑𝑒𝑝𝑡ℎ(cid:3050)(𝐵) − 2 ∗ 𝑑𝑒𝑝𝑡ℎ(cid:3050)(cid:3435)𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑠𝑡𝑜𝑟(𝐴, 𝐵)(cid:3439),   

(8) 

where ancestor(A,B) is a common parent of concepts A and B. 

     𝑠𝑖𝑚𝑖𝑙𝑎𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑦(𝐴, 𝐵) = (cid:4682)

(cid:2870)(cid:2879)(cid:3031)(cid:3036)(cid:3046)(cid:3047)(cid:3028)(cid:3041)(cid:3030)(cid:3032)(cid:3298)((cid:3002),(cid:3003))
(cid:2870)

, 𝑖𝑓 𝑝𝑎𝑖𝑟 𝑖𝑠 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑛𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑑

0, otherwise

(9) 

The process that we followed is: (a) Query in SPARQL the Joconde metadata to obtain co-occurrence and 

calculate Tversky index for each concept pair. (b) Query in SPARQL Joconde metadata and its thesaurus to 
obtain distances between concepts and calculate weighted distance and similarity. (c) Select the top pairs with 

Tversky index greater than 0.30 and sort them in descending order in a first list. (d) Rank the same pairs in a 
second list by the graph distance in ascending order. (e) Calculate the rank difference for each pair in the two 

16 

 
 
 
  
sorted list 𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑘_𝑑𝑖𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑒(𝐴, 𝐵) = 𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑘(cid:3046)(cid:3036)(cid:3040)(cid:3036)(cid:3039)(cid:3028)(cid:3045)(cid:3036)(cid:3047)(cid:3052)(𝐴, 𝐵) − 𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑘(cid:3031)(cid:3036)(cid:3046)(cid:3047)(cid:3028)(cid:3041)(cid:3030)(cid:3032)(𝐴, 𝐵) (f) Finally sort the result list of the 
pairs by ascending order of rank difference 𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑘_𝑑𝑖𝑓𝑓𝑒𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑒(𝐴, 𝐵)  

As a result, at the top of the resulting list we obtain the pairs of concepts that are far away from each other 
or even not connected by the graph but at the same time related by context. At the bottom of the list, we have 
the pairs that are closely connected but do not appear together in the annotation15.  

Figure  4  represents  the  results  comparing  the  ranks  in  the  case  of  human  annotations  and  predictions. 

Analyzing the chart, we may conclude that (1) The analysis incidentally confirms that we were correct by relating 
the (cheval (horse), cavalier (horseman)) concepts during the earlier stage based on visual examination. (2) It 

also points out that other concepts such as (bateau (boat), mer (sea)) and (cheval (horse), voiture à attelage 
(tow car)) could be linked provided the proper predicate to capture these kinds of links. 

These pairs provide candidates to improve the thesaurus and impact the labeling for image classification as 

well as search results. The direction of the link is such as “concept A is likely to appear with concept B”. 

Figure 4: Low (negative and close to negative) rank difference indicates that the concept pairs that are not closely related 
by Garnier Thesaurus but are similar by the original annotations' context. 

We applied the same process to the predictions of the deep learning models comparing the co-occurrences 

between the predicted concepts and distance similarity in the thesaurus and the outcome confirms the results 
of the comparison of the human annotation in terms of finding connections between the concepts as shown on 

Figure 5(a). But these results have a longer list of the pairs with a high Tversky similarity index and some of 
them  also  confirm  the  results  discussed  in  the  next  section  5.2.  For  example,  the  visually  similar  “building” 

concepts such as maison (house), château (castle), or tour (tower) often classify as present at the same time 
on the  image and  it also appears that these  concepts are closely related in the  DBPedia.fr thesaurus as on 

Figure 5(b). The full figure is available in Supplementary materials (Figure S2). 

15 This may be due to the one concept being a sub-concept of another as we can see for (bateau à voile, bateau) pair 

17 

 
 
 
 
                                                  
(a) 

(b) 

Figure 5 Low (negative and close to negative) rank difference indicates that the concepts pairs that are not closely related 
by Garnier Thesaurus but are similar by the predictions (score > 0.9) context. 

5.2 Contrasting distance similarity in Garnier Thesaurus with graph extracted from DBPedia.fr 

The  previous  sections  and  experiments  all  showed  the  impact  of  the  structure  of  the  thesaurus  used  as  a 
reference to annotate the cultural collection on the analysis and processing we can perform on the data. We 

therefore  decided  to  experiment  with  methods  that  could  highlight  the  underlying  conceptualization  and 
formalization choices of the thesaurus itself and its bias, noises and silences. The idea was that a curator may 

also need to be aware of these shortcomings to improve the metadata and their use. For this study we defined 
and formalized a SPARQL query to obtain the graph of relations between our 40 concepts but this time in the 

hierarchy of the thesaurus that can be found in the linked open dataset DBPedia.fr. The hypothesis was that 
since  the  DBpedia  is  a  much  broader  knowledge  base  it  may  provide  some  different  information  than  a 

specialized cultural thesaurus. 

The  Joconde  dataset  provides  the  mapping  between  the  Garnier  Thesaurus  concepts  and  DBPedia.fr 

categories where it is possible. In the case of our 40 concepts, 3 matching categories could not be found in the 
DBPedia.fr (à mi-corps (mid-body), de face (front), de profil (sideways)) and were omitted. 

DBpedia being a very dense graph, when querying the ancestors of the categories we experimented with 
different  levels  of  ancestry  from  3  parents  to  6  parents.  The  graph  where  we  query  up  to  6  parents  of  the 

categories becomes rooted at the top node of DBPedia.fr and therefore connects all categories in one tree-like 
graph. The graph with lower depth of ancestry (for example, 3) forms a forest of smaller trees and that allows 

for some categories not being connected as shown in Table 8. 

Looking  at  the  Figure  6  (a)  and  considering  the  top-5  ranked  pairs,  large  green  circles:  (1)  reveals  the 

similarity of pairs of animals in the group (lion, mouton, cheval, chien) that are surprisingly not closely related in 
the DPBedia.fr; (2) confirms the relations between concepts in pairs (cheval, cavalier) and (cheval, voiture à 

attelage) relations discovered by the different methods discussed in section 5.1. On the opposite side, top-5 
ranked orange circles (3) reveals the pairs that have high similarity only in DBpedia and either represent the 

visual similarity (château, église) and (château, maison), or context similarity (arbre, maison) and (en buste, nu) 
and these could be suggestions of additional relations to consider in the thesaurus or metadata. We think that 

the artifact of the (nu, église) pair can be explained by the fact that often the angels and saints are portrayed 

18 

 
 
 
 
unclothed. This pair would typically be reviewed by a curator following a “human in the loop” approach and, in 
the end, it may not trigger an extension of the thesaurus.  

Table 8: Same concepts/categories relations sub-graphs extracted from different knowledge graphs: Joconde’s REPR 
thesaurus based on the Garnier Thesaurus and DBPedia.fr with different ancestry depths. 

Garnier Thesaurus graph of 40 leaf 

DBPedia.fr graph of 37 leaf categories and 

DBPedia.fr graph of 37 categories and 

concepts and their ancestors 

their ancestors with depth 6 

their ancestors with depth 3 

Even more consistent results in terms of representation of visual similarity are shown by the graph extracted 

with less ancestors as on Figure 6 (b). It shows that the control of the level of abstraction may help in identifying 
relevant  additions  to  make  to  the  knowledge  graph.  Full  resolution  charts  are  included  in  Supplementary 

materials (Figures S3 & S4). 

(a) 

(b)  

Figure 6: The bubble chart of the similarity differences between the sub-graphs extracted from Garnier Thesaurus and 
DBPedia.fr with ancestry depth 6 (a) and 3 (b). Large circles represent large differences between the similarities. 

19 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In  contrast  with  Granier  Thesaurus  DBPedias.fr  sub-graph  with  ancestry  depth  3  reveals  close  relations 
between the head covering concepts (casque, chapeau) (helmet, hat), (casque, couronne) (helmet, crown), and 

(chapeau, couronne) (hat, crown) which are visually similar. The pairs (armure, uniforme) (armor, uniform) and 
(casque, uniforme) (helmet, uniform) represent more the context-based similarity. 

By  examining  the  results,  we  can  see  that  such  comparison  of  the  different  graphs  can  uncover  the 
information that can help the art collection curators improve the knowledge graph annotating its collection by 

adding relations, classes to the thesaurus and  by considering new means to acquire them in  generating the 
descriptions. 

5.3 Using semantic relations in improving classification prediction scores 

The  complete  semantic  annotation  of  an  artwork  in  the  collection  provides  a  context  that  can  help  identify 
suspiciously present or missing concepts. Considering the results discussed in section 5.1 we wanted to explore 

whether a probability of appearance of one concept of a context-similar pair can improve the probability score 
of the second concept in the same image. For example, if a high classification probability score for a bateau 

(boat)  could  influence  the  score  of  the  concept  mer  (sea).  To  achieve  this,  we  used  a  logistic  regression 
approach. The idea is to build a pairwise regression predictor of appearance of the concept A of a pair (A, B) 

based on the presence of concept B in the Joconde dataset metadata. Both dependent variable (concept A) 
and predictor (concept B) are binary labels. The regression estimates the log-odds (Equation 6) of observing 

concept A when concept B is present compared to situations when concept B is not present.  

𝑙𝑜𝑔 (cid:3435)𝑜𝑑𝑑𝑠(𝐴)(cid:3439)   =   𝛽(cid:2868) +   𝛽(cid:2869) ∗ 𝐵, 𝑤ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑒 𝛽(cid:2869) = 𝑙𝑜𝑔  (cid:4672)

(cid:3042)(cid:3031)(cid:3031)(cid:3046)((cid:3002)|(cid:3003))

(cid:3042)(cid:3031)(cid:3031)(cid:3046)((cid:3002) (cid:3041)(cid:3042) (cid:3003)

(cid:4673) 

(6) 

These estimates are dependent on the dataset. If a different dataset is used it might lead to a different value 
of  𝛽(cid:2869). Binary  indicator  model  compares  situations  when  concept  B  is  present  or  not.  But  because  machine 
learning  models  predict  concepts  with  continuous  probability  scores  S(A)  and  S(B),  we  want  to  reuse  the 

regression  parameters  to  predict  an  adjustment  of  probability  score  of  concept  A  of  pair  (A,  B)  based  on  a 
difference of probability score of concept B compared to a baseline P(B)base that concept B is present.  

𝑙𝑜𝑔 (cid:3435)𝑜𝑑𝑑𝑠(𝐴)(cid:3028)(cid:3031)(cid:3037)(cid:3439)   =   𝛽(cid:2868) +   𝛽(cid:2869) ∗ (𝑆(𝐵) − 𝑃(𝐵)(cid:3029)(cid:3028)(cid:3046)(cid:3032)),  

(7) 

where S(B) is a classification prediction score of B. P(B)base can be calculated as a frequency of this concept 

in the dataset. Thus, we consider how much the prediction score for B is higher (or lower) than the one obtained 
purely  by  chance.  For  the  Joconde  dataset  we  estimated  P(B)base  by  direct  counting  of  concepts  in  the 

annotations in the training set (to be noticed, that the training set is better balanced than the entire dataset).  

An alternative would be to set it up at the classification threshold determined by threshold selection algorithm 

during  classifier training. Another,  less desirable alternative, is to  set it  up  0.5  which indicates  that the label 
could be equally present or not present, which is a very strong assumption for a visual art dataset.  

We assume that an unadjusted estimate of  S(A) corresponds to  the  baseline probability P(B)base  and the 

adjustment could be made by using the actual prediction score S(B). The adjusted odds of A thus become:  

𝑜𝑑𝑑𝑠(𝐴)(cid:3028)(cid:3031)(cid:3037) =   (cid:3020)((cid:3002))

(cid:2869)(cid:2879)(cid:3020)((cid:3002))

∗   𝑒(cid:3081)(cid:3117)∗((cid:3020)((cid:3003))(cid:2879)(cid:3017)((cid:3003))(cid:3277)(cid:3276)(cid:3294)(cid:3280)) 

(8) 

20 

 
 
 
In case of S(B) = Pbase(B), there will be no adjustments to the score. This approach also considers that when 
the score of  label  B  is  lower  than  the  average,  it  will  reduce  the  probability  of  label  A.  This  approach  might 

impact recall and precision not symmetrically which can lead to subjective decisions. For example, the presence 
of a boat often implies some body of water, however the sea might be present on a painting without any boat. 

We thus considered an additional threshold for the lower values of P(B)base, below which we do not consider 
adjustments. This modification will adjust the prediction score of concept A when the label B is present and will 

leave S(A) unadjusted when P(B)base is low. 

We developed the method of adjusting the probability scores of concept A in the context-bases pair (A, B) 

and evaluated the adjustments on  the test set: (a) Estimate the  odds  ratio from a logistic  regression on  the 
metadata of the training set. (Equation 6) (b) Estimate the baseline probability for concept B on the same data. 

(c)  Calculate  the  adjusted  prediction  score  for  concept  A  from  the  estimated  odd  ratio  coefficient  and  the 
difference between the estimated baseline and prediction score for concept B. (Equation 8) (d) Evaluate the 

adjusted prediction using standard metrics 

For step (b) we experimented with different ways of determining the baseline probability of predictor concept 

P(B)base:. (1) frequency estimate based on the population of image annotations (2) uniformed estimate P(B)base 
= 0.5 (3) subjective decision estimate 1: P(B)base is the decision threshold for the concept B calculated during 

the training (4) subjective decision estimate 2: P(B)base is the decision threshold for the concept B calculated 
during  the  training  but  the  adjustment  to  S(A)  applied  only  if  S(B)  >  0.5  (5)  subjective  decision  estimate  3: 

P(B)base is the decision threshold for the concept B calculated during the training the adjustment to S(A) applied 
if  S(B)  >  0.70  (6)  subjective  dichotomised  estimate:  P(B)base  is  the  decision  threshold  for  the  concept  B 

calculated during the training. If S(B) >P(B)base, then (S(B) - P(B)base) = 1.0, otherwise 0.0 

The results of our method application to the example of concepts (mer, bateau) (sea, boat) in the population 

of the test set after obtaining the prediction scores with 40-class multi-label Inception v3 model and considering 
different types of P(B)base estimates are shown in Table 9. 

Table 9: Evaluation of adjusted prediction of concept mer (sea) applying different baseline probability of predictor concept 
bateau (boat). 

A = mer (sea) & B = bateau (boat) 

P(bateau)base 

initial model  

adjustment with frequency estimated P(B)base 
adjustment with uniformed estimate of P(B)base 
adjustment with subjective decision estimate 1 of P(B)base 
adjustment with subjective decision estimate 2 of P(B)base 

adjustment with subjective decision estimate 3 of P(B)base 

0.0778 

0.5 

0.85 

0.85 

0.85 

F1 

0.54 

0.35 

0.42 

0.51 

0.52 

0.52 

AP 

0.54 

0.48 

0.48 

0.48 

0.53 

0.52 

Although the F1 and AP metrics are lower with any of the adjustment techniques, we chose the highlighted 

technique as the best by looking at what changes the adjustment actually made.  

It  turns  out  that  the  majority  of  the  changed  outcomes  were  missing  annotation,  e.g.  the  original  human 
annotations did not contain the concept mer (sea), while the image actually contained the depiction of a sea. 

Thus, model prediction could be used to detect silences with a human in the loop.  

With the adjustment, model prediction moved some of the predictions above the detection threshold, as in 

the example in Table 10 where the original prediction score was under the decision threshold for concept mer 
(sea) 0.90 but after the adjustment the concept mer (sea) prediction score appeared over the threshold. 

21 

 
 
 
 
In our sample of 4463 images 109 were labelled as mer (sea) and 300 as bateau (boat), with 59 samples 
with both. Our procedure discovered additional 19 images containing mer (sea) among 300 images of bateau 

where the mer (sea) label was absent. Thus, we increased mer (sea) labels by 17% (19/109) and increased 
joining mer and bateau images by 32%.  

This improvement, however, did not come without a price. For a small number of samples (3% of all images 
labeled  mer  (sea)  the  prediction  score  for  concept  mer  (sea)  went  down  below  the  decision  threshold  thus 

creating false  negatives.  This  loss  of  information  was  much  smaller  than  the  discovery  of  new  labels.  In  an 
approach where we would keep humans in the loop to validate the curation these results remain very interesting 

in terms of automation and scaling. We could further target to learn the optimal prediction adjustment strategy 
by analyzing the interactions of curators with our system. 

Table 10: Example of the artwork with the adjustment of prediction score of concept mer (sea) by the prediction score of 
concept bateau (boat). 

Image 

Labels & Metadata 

S(mer) 

S(bateau) 

S(mer)adj 

bateau (boat) 

0.8985 

0.9981 

0.9307 

paysage (Le Havre, bateau à voiles, 
crépuscule, soleil) 
(landscape (Le Havre, sailing boat, twilight, 
sun)) 

6.  CONCLUSIONS 

The  value  of  cultural  institutions  lies  not  only  in  their  collections  but  also  in  the  knowledge  extracted  by  art 

curators from the works of art in these collections. Quality of the services that can be offered by these collections 
in  terms  of  search  engines,  recommendation  and  support  depends  on  the  quality  of  the  catalog  and  its 

metadata. Each art object is peculiar by its content, material, and style, thus the knowledge extracted for each 

piece  must  be  very  precise  and  technical.  This  increases  the  difficulty  to  define  a  common  knowledge 
representation and annotation method for an entire artwork collection, and leads to incomplete metadata, or 

non-uniform metadata due to the variations of methods and the variety of actors involved. As far as we know 
few of the CBIR systems are combining visual information retrieval with semantic analysis and reasoning on 

the  metadata  or  at  least  not  jointly  to  correct  or  refine  the  content.  Moreover,  such  systems  were  mostly 
designed to  provide new tools for cultural heritage content exploration by a large audience and non-experts 

rather than to support curators in refining and maintaining the knowledge associated with the collections. 

In this paper we showed that the coupling of machine learning approaches with knowledge representation 

and  reasoning  approaches  (Semantic Web  and  linked  data)  has  the  potential  to  (1)  enhance  metadata,  (2) 
automate or semi-automate artwork annotation, (3) rank search results by visual relevance of a search criteria, 

(4) and assess the usability of an existing thesaurus for the latest AI methods. 

In the process, we showed that state-of-the-art machine learning algorithms do not work as well in the domain 

of the diverse visual art as it does with the collections consisting of the specifically chosen photographs. This is 
also  true  when  comparing  perfect  annotations  of  standard  image  benchmark  datasets  with  imperfection  of 

22 

 
 
 
 
 
human  annotations  in  a  specific  domain.  However,  we  found  some  methods  that  may  allow  the  museum 
collection curators to improve the annotations in an automated or semi-automated way. 

Our research combined the explorations in the semantic reasoning over the structured metadata to enhance 
the  image  classification  and  in  reverse  to  use  the  results  of  the  image  classification  to  suggest  the 

enhancements of the metadata. 

We  designed  a  pipeline  that  exploits  the  logic  in  the  metadata  organization  to  enhance  the  labeling 

mechanism for the deep learning models training, training the model, making predictions, combining the results 
of predictions with the initial metadata, and eventually querying the extended metadata to help with tasks that 

may be performed on such dataset. These tasks include cleaning and enriching the metadata and performing 
content-based information search with better relevance. The integration relies on a semantic Web formalization 

and an extension of the Joconde metadata with a vocabulary for Deep Learning model prediction scores to be 
used in analytical queries leveraging reasoning and querying capabilities of the RDF galaxy. 

In the process we also discovered that the industry standard iconographic thesaurus may not be sufficient 
to describe the data for quality searches. In particular, we showed that the Garnier thesaurus was not designed 

for  the  tasks  we  targeted,  and  we  therefore  proposed  methods  to  make  suggestions  on  how  to  extend  the 
metadata and the thesaurus to make it more adequate to the tasks of searching the collection and improving 

the catalog metadata. 

For the future we consider several extensions of this work such as synthetic image generation for under-

represented  concepts,  increasing  the  metadata  exploited  by  the  machine  learning  methods,  and  evaluation 
some of the latest approaches in segmentation for relevance scoring and further hybridizing methods between 

neural networks and ontology-based representations.  

Combining deep learning and reasoning to improve information retrieval and predictive modelling results is 

a trend in AI in many areas of science such as medicine, biology, geology to name a few, where both structured 
and unstructured data is available. Although our work was focused on the cultural domain and a specific dataset, 

our proposed methodology can be applied to other datasets that include signal data (e.g. images) and structured 
metadata.  Other  domains  and  datasets  may  call  for  different  reasoning  rules  and  classification  models, 

however,  the  general  pipeline  of  enhancing  metadata,  selecting  and  training  a  classifier,  and  then  using 
classification results as an extension of the metadata can easily be applied to other annotated multimedia data 

collections. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

We would like to thank the French Ministry of Culture for funding this work through the MonaLIA project and 

Bertrand Sajus and Laurent Manœuvre for providing the Joconde dataset and domain expert support from the 
cultural institution point of view.  

This work is also partially supported by European Union´s Horizon 2020 research and innovation program under 
grant number 951911 - AI4Media 

REFERENCES 

[1]  Olga Russakovsky, Jia Deng, Hao Su, Jonathan Krause, Sanjeev Satheesh, Sean Ma, Zhiheng Huang, Andrej Karpathy, Aditya Khosla, 
Michael Bernstein, et al. 2015. Imagenet large scale visual recognition challenge. International journal of computer vision115, 3 (2015), 
211–252. 

[2]  Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr Dollár, and C Lawrence Zitnick. 2014. 

Microsoft coco: Common objects in context. In European conference on computer vision. Springer, 740–755. 

23 

 
 
 
[3]  Dinggang  Shen,  Guorong  Wu,  and  Heung-Il  Suk.  2017.  Deep  learning  in  medical  image  analysis.  Annual  review  of  biomedical 

engineering19 (2017), 221–248. 

[4]  Yuval  Mednikov,  Sapir  Nehemia,  Bin  Zheng,  Oshra  Benzaquen,  and  Dror  Lederman.  2018.  Transfer  representation  learning  using 
Inception-V3  for the  detection  of  masses  in mammography.  In2018 40th  Annual  International  Conference  of  the  IEEE  Engineering in 
Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC). IEEE, 2587–2590. 

[5]  Catherine  Sandoval  Rodriguez,  Margaret  Lech,  and  Elena  Pirogova.  2018.  Classification  of  style  in  fine-art  paintings  using  transfer 
learning  and  weighted  image  patches.  In  2018  12th  International  Conference  on  Signal  Processing  and  Communication  Systems 
(ICSPCS). IEEE, 1–7. 

[6]  Catherine  Sandoval,  Elena  Pirogova,  and  Margaret  Lech.2019.  Two-stage  deep  learning  approach  to  the  classification  of  fine-art 

paintings. IEEE Access 7 (2019), 41770-41781. 

[7]  Sergey Karayev, Matthew Trentacoste, Helen Han, Aseem Agarwala, Trevor Darrell, Aaron Hertzmann, and Holger Winnemoeller. 2014. 

Recognizing Image Style. Proceedings of the British Machine Vision Conference 2014 (2014). https://doi.org/10.5244/c.28.122 

[8]  Adrian Lecoutre, Benjamin Negrevergne, and Florian Yger. 2017. Recognizing art style automatically in painting with deep learning. In 

Asian conference on machine learning. PMLR, 327–342. 

[9]  Eva Cetinic, Tomislav Lipic, and Sonja Grgic. 2018. Fine-tuning convolutional neural networks for fine art classification. Expert Systems 

with Applications 114 (2018), 107-118. 

[10]  Benoit Seguin, Carlotta Striolo, and Frederic Kaplan. 2016. Visual link retrieval in a database of paintings. In European Conference on 

Computer Vision., Springer, 753-767. 

[11]  Matthew  R.  Boutell,  Jiebo  Luo,  Xipeng  Shen,  and  Christopher  M.  Brown.  2004.  Learning  multi-label  scene  classification.  Pattern 

recognition 37, 9 (2004), 1757-1771. 

[12]  Karen  Simonyan  and  Andrew  Zisserman.  2015.  Very  deep  convolutional  networks  for  large-scale  image  recognition.  In  International 

Conference on Learning Representations. 

[13]  Christian Szegedy, Vincent Vanhoucke, Sergey Ioffe, Jon Shlens, and Zbigniew Wojna. 2016. Rethinking the inception architecture for 

computer vision. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2818-2826. 

[14]  Tim Berners-Lee, James Hendler and Ora Lassila. 2001. The semantic web. Scientific American 284, 5 (2001), 34-43. 

[15]  François Garnier. 1984. Thesaurus iconographique. Système descriptif des représentations, Paris : CNRS (1984). 

[16]  Laurent  Manœuvre.  2015.  Numérique  et  nouveaux  enjeux  pour  le  patrimoine.  La  Lettre  de  l’OCIM.  Musées,  Patrimoine  et  Culture 

scientifiques et techniques 162 (2015), 63-65. 

[17]  Bertrand  Sajus  and  Marie-Véronique  Leroi.  2016.  Le  développement  du  web  des  données  culturelles.  I2D  Information,  donnees 

documents 53, 2 (2016), 46-47. 

[18]  Jesse Read. 2010. Scalable multi-label classification. Ph.D. Dissertation. University of Waikato. 

[19]  Alistair  Miles,  Brian  Matthews,  Michael  Wilson,  and  Dan  Brickley.  2005.  SKOS  core:  simple  knowledge  organisation  for  the  web.  In 

International Conference on Dublin Core and Metadata Applications, 3-10.  

[20]  Aidan Hogan, Andreas Harth, Alexandre Passant, Stefan Decker, and Axel Polleres. 2010. Weaving the pedantic web. In LDOW. 

[21]  Christian Mader, Bernhard Haslhofer, and Antoine Isaac. 2012. Finding quality issues in SKOS vocabularies. In International Conference 

on Theory and Practice of Digital Libraries. Springer, 222-233. 

[22]  Hua Chen, Antoine Trouve, Kazuaki J. Murakami, and Akira Fukuda. 2017. An intelligent annotation-based image retrieval system based 

on RDF descriptions. Computers & Electrical Engineering 58 (2017), 537-550. 

[23]  Umar Manzoor, Mohammed A. Balubaid, Bassam Zafar, Hafsa Umar, and M. Shoaib Khan. 2015. Semantic image retrieval: An ontology 

based approach. International Journal of Advanced Research in Artificial Intelligence 4, 4 (2015), 1-8. 

[24]  Yi-Hui Chen, Eric Jui-Lin Lu,  and Sheng-Chia Lin. 2020. Ontology-based Dynamic Semantic Annotation for Social Image Retrieval. In 

2020 21st IEEE International Conference on Mobile Data Management (MDM). IEEE, 337-341. 

[25]  Ruizhe  Zhao,  Ho-Cheung  Ng,  Wayne  Luk,  and  Xinyu  Niu.  2018.  Towards  efficient  convolutional  neural  network  for  domain-specific 

applications on FPGA. In 2018 28th International Conference on Field Programmable Logic and Applications (FPL). IEEE, 147-1477.  

[26]  Taranjit Kaur and Tapan Kumar Gandhi. 2019. Automated brain image classification based on VGG-16 and transfer learning. In 2019 

International Conference on Information Technology (ICIT). IEEE, 94-98. 

[27]  Yassir Benhammou, Siham Tabik, Boujemâa Achchab, and Francisco Herrera. 2018. A first study exploring the performance of the state-
of-the  art  CNN model in  the  problem  of  breast  cancer.  In  Proceedings  of  the  International  Conference  on  Learning  and Optimization 
Algorithms: Theory and Applications. 1-6.  

[28]  Yin Cui, Yang Song, Chen Sun, Andrew Howard, and Serge Belongie. 2018. Large scale fine-grained categorization and domain-specific 

transfer learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 4109-4118. 

[29]  Olivier Corby, Rose Dieng-Kuntz, and Catherine Faron Zucker. 2004. Querying the semantic web with corese search engine. In European 

conference on artificial intelligence. 

[30]  Olivier Corby, Rose Dieng-Kuntz, Catherine Faron Zucker, and Fabien Gandon. 2006. Ontology-based approximate query processing for 

searching the semantic web with corese. Ph. D. Dissertation. INRIA. 

[31]  Reem Al-Otaibi, Peter Flach, and Meelis Kull. 2014. Multi-label classification:  A comparative study on threshold selection methods. In 

24 

 
 
 
First International Workshop on Learning over Multiple Contexts (LMCE) at ECML-PKDD 2014. 

[32]  Donna Kurtz, Greg Parker, David Shotton, Graham Klyne, Florian Schroff, Andrew Zisserman, and Yorick Wilks. 2009. "CLAROS-Bringing 

Classical Art to a Global Public. In 2009 5th IEEE International Conference on e-Science. IEEE, 20-27. 

[33]  Vivien Petras, Timothy Hill, Juliane Stiller, and Maria Gäde. 2017 Europeana–a Search Engine for Digitised Cultural Heritage Material. 

Datenbank-Spektrum 17, 1 (2017), 41-46. 

[34]  David Gorisse, Matthieu Cord, Michel Jordan, Sylvie Philipp-Foliguet, and Frédéric Precioso. 2007. 3d content-based retrieval in artwork 

databases. In 2007 3DTV Conference. IEEE, 1-4. 

[35]  Lirone  Samoun,  Thomas  Fisichella,  Diane  Lingrand,  Lucas  Malleus,  and  Frederic  Precioso.  2018.  An  Interactive  Content-Based  3D 
Shape Retrieval System for on-Site Cultural Heritage Analysis. In 2018 25th IEEE International Conference on Image Processing (ICIP). 
IEEE, 1043-1047. 

[36]  Guus Schreiber, Alia Amin, Lora Aroyo, Mark van Assem, Victor de Boer, Lynda Hardman, Michiel Hildebrand, Borys Omelayenko, Jacco 
vanOsenbruggen, Anna Tordai, et al. 2008. Semantic annotation and search of cultural-heritage collections: Semantic annotation and 
search of cultural-heritage collections: The MultimediaN E-Culture demonstrator. Journal of Web Semantics 6, 4 (2008), 243–249. 

[37]  Egon L. van den Broek, Thijs Kok, Theo E. Schouten, and Eduard Hoenkamp. 2006. Multimedia for art retrieval (m4art). In Multimedia 

Content Analysis, Management, and Retrieval 2006, Vol. 6073. International Society for Optics and Photonics, 60730Z. 

[38]  Giovanna  Castellano,  Eufemia  Lella,  and  Gennaro  Vessio.  2021  Visual  link  retrieval  and  knowledge  discovery  in  painting  datasets. 

Multimedia Tools and Applications 80, 5 (2021), 6599–6616. 

[39]  Zhenzhong  Kuang, Zongmin Li, Tianyi Zhao, and Jianping Fan. 2017. Deep multi-task learning for large-scale image classification. In 

2017 IEEE Third International Conference on Multimedia Big Data (BigMM). IEEE, 310-317. 

[40]  Zhenzhong  Kuang, Jun  Yu, Zongmin  Li,  Baopeng  Zhang,  and  Jianping  Fan.  2018.  Integrating  multi-level  deep  learning  and concept 

ontology for large-scale visual recognition. Pattern Recognition 78 (2018), 198–214. 

[41]  Hexiang Hu, Guang-Tong Zhou, Zhiwei Deng, Zicheng Liao, and Greg Mori. 2016. Learning structured inference neural networks with 

label relations. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. 2960-2968.  

[42]  Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. 2015. Delving deep into rectifiers: Surpassing human-level performance on 

imagenet classification. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision. 1026-1034. 

[43]  Sinno Jialin Pan and Qiang Yang. 2009. A survey on transfer learning. IEEE Transactions on knowledge and data engineering 22, 10 

(2009), 1345-1359. 

[44]  Amr  Ahmed,  Kai  Yu,  Wei  Xu,  Yihong  Gong,  and  Eric  Xing.  2008.  Training  hierarchical  feed-forward  visual  recognition  models  using 

transfer learning from pseudo-tasks. In European Conference on Computer Vision. Springer, 69–82. 

[45]  Ali  Sharif  Razavian,  Hossein  Azizpour,  Josephine  Sullivan,  and  Stefan  Carlsson.  2014.    CNN  features  off-the-shelf:  an  astounding 
baseline for recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition workshops. 806–813. 

[46]  Maxime  Oquab,  Leon  Bottou,  Ivan  Laptev,  and  Josef  Sivic.  2014.  Learning  and  transferring  mid-level  image  representations  using 

convolutional neural networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 1717-1724.  

[47]  Jason Yosinski, Jeff Clune, Yoshua Bengio, and Hod Lipson. 2014. How transferable are features in deep neural networks Advances in 

Neural Information Processing Systems 27 (2014), 3320–3328. 

[48]  Wei Ren Tan, Chee Seng Chan, Hernán E. Aguirre, and Kiyoshi Tanaka. 2016. Ceci n'est pas une pipe: A deep convolutional network 

for fine-art paintings classification. In 2016 IEEE international conference on image processing (ICIP). IEEE, 3703-3707. 

[49]  Ke Yan, Yifan Peng, Veit Sandfort, Mohammadhadi Bagheri, Zhiyong Lu, and Ronald M. Summers. 2019. Holistic and comprehensive 
annotation of clinically significant findings on diverse CT images: learning from radiology reports and label ontology. In Proceedings of 
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. 8523-8532.  

[50]  Yannick  L.  Kergosien,  and  Daniel  Racoceanu.  2017.  Semantic  knowledge  for  histopathological  image  analysis:  from  ontologies  to 
processing  portals  and  deep  learning.  In 13th  International  Conference  on  Medical  Information  Processing  and  Analysis,  Vol. 10572. 
International Society for Optics and Photonics, 105721F. 

[51]  Casey Breen, Latifur Khan, and Arunkumar Ponnusamy. 2002. Image classification using neural networks and ontologies. In Proceedings. 

13th International Workshop on Database and Expert Systems Applications. IEEE, 98-102. 

[52]  Vasileios  Mezaris,  Ioannis  Kompatsiaris,  and  Michael  G.  Strintzis.  2003  An  ontology  approach  to  object-based  image  retrieval.  In 

Proceedings 2003 International Conference on Image Processing (Cat. No. 03CH37429), Vol. 2. IEEE, II–511. 

[53]  Jalila Filali, Hajer Baazaoui Zghal, and Jean Martinet. 2020. Ontology-based image classification and annotation. International Journal of 

Pattern Recognition and Artificial Intelligence 34, 11 (2020), 2040002. 

25 

 
 
 
