A logical model for the ontology alignment repair game
Line van den Berg, Manuel Atencia, Jérôme Euzenat

To cite this version:

Line van den Berg, Manuel Atencia, Jérôme Euzenat. A logical model for the ontology alignment
repair game. Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems, 2021, 35 (2), pp.1-32. ￿10.1007/s10458-
021-09508-8￿. ￿hal-03426142￿

HAL Id: hal-03426142

https://hal.science/hal-03426142

Submitted on 12 Nov 2021

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems 35:32, 2021
DOI:10.1007/s10458-021-09508-8

A Logical Model for the Ontology Alignment Repair
Game

Line van den Berg ¨ Manuel Atencia ¨
J´erˆome Euzenat

Received: 2020-10-05 / Accepted: 2021-05-20 / Published: 2021-06-26

Abstract Ontology alignments enable agents to communicate while preserving
heterogeneity in their knowledge. Alignments may not be provided as input and
should be able to evolve when communication fails or when new information con-
tradicting the alignment is acquired. The Alignment Repair Game (ARG) has been
proposed for agents to simultaneously communicate and repair their alignments
through adaptation operators when communication failures occur. ARG has been
evaluated experimentally and the experiments showed that agents converge to-
wards successful communication and improve their alignments. However, whether
the adaptation operators are formally correct, complete or redundant could not
be established by experiments. We introduce a logical model, Dynamic Epistemic
Ontology Logic (DEOL), that enables us to answer these questions. This frame-
work allows us (1) to express the ontologies and alignments used via a faithful
translation from ARG to DEOL, (2) to model the ARG adaptation operators as
dynamic modalities and (3) to formally deﬁne and establish the correctness, partial
redundancy and incompleteness of the adaptation operators in ARG.

Keywords Ontology alignment ¨ Alignment repair ¨ Multi-agent systems ¨ Agent
communication ¨ Dynamic Epistemic Logic

1 Introduction

Agents may use ontologies or other logical representations of their knowledge of
the world they live in. In autonomous agent systems this may lead them to develop

L. van den Berg
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LIG, F-38000 Grenoble France E-mail:
line.van-den-berg@inria.fr

M. Atencia
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LIG, F-38000 Grenoble France E-mail:
manuel.atencia@inria.fr

J. Euzenat
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LIG, F-38000 Grenoble France E-mail:
jerome.euzenat@inria.fr

2

Line van den Berg et al.

diﬀerent ontologies. This heterogeneity causes a problem when agents try to com-
municate: how do agents understand each other if they express their knowledge in
diﬀerent ways?

Ontology matching has been developed to allow agents with diﬀerent knowledge
representations to communicate [23]. Ontology matching algorithms aim to ﬁnd
relationships holding across entities of two ontologies, the ontology alignment. Yet,
ontology matching algorithms may output only partially correct or incomplete
alignments, and there may be situations in which agents constantly evolve their
ontologies requiring alignments to evolve accordingly. This means that alignments
have to evolve. One way for agents to achieve this is to adapt the alignments when
experience shows them that one of them is not correct.

These types of scenarios are of widespread application. For instance, one may
consider the situation where agents are taking care of a warehouse that contin-
uously has to take into account the references of new suppliers and to reclassify
them in function of diﬀerent characteristics. Similarly, one may consider social
care robots that independently generalise from what they observe and have to
coordinate with diﬀerent such robots. Of course, it is possible to shut down the
warehouse and to stop social care waiting for the re-engineering of a common
ontology. But this would not be very reactive, nor very open.

The Alignment Repair Game (ARG) [11, 13], inspired by cultural language
evolution [24], is a model of such situations, used for performing simulations. It
allows agents to communicate and, in parallel, evolve their alignments through
local corrective actions whenever their communication fails. In ARG, the agents
are adaptive: they blindly apply adaptation operators that specify how to modify
the failing alignment.

ARG is used to assess the eﬀect of diﬀerent adaptation operators on agents’
knowledge. It was evaluated experimentally and the experiments showed that
the agents converge towards successful communication and improve their align-
ments [13]. However, experiments do not assess formal properties of operators, i.e.
whether they are logically correct, complete or redundant.

In this paper we introduce a logical model based on Dynamic Epistemic Logic
(DEL) [34] called Dynamic Epistemic Ontology Logic (DEOL) to answer this ques-
tion. In particular, DEOL enables us to express the ontologies and alignments via
a faithful translation and to model the ARG adaptation operators as dynamic
modalities. This allows us to formally deﬁne correctness, completeness and redun-
dancy for ARG and to use these deﬁnitions to prove that all but the add operator
are correct, that delete, addjoin and refine are redundant for one agent and
that all operators are incomplete.

The contributions of this paper are thus to (1) provide a logical framework
suitable to model the alignment repair game, (2) formally deﬁne the formal prop-
erties of the adaptation operators: correctness, redundancy and completeness, (3)
prove whether these properties hold for delete, add, addjoin, refine and refadd,
and ﬁnally (4) theoretically compare adaptive agents and logical agents.

We restrict the logical modelling to ARG, however, the techniques presented
here could be extended to establish formal properties of other games that are
designed for agents to improve alignments through interaction.

This paper is an extension of [5] which provides a precise deﬁnition of the game,
ontologies and alignments (dropping the adaptation operator replace without
loss of generality to gain clarity); a complete revised section of related work; a

A Logical Model for the Ontology Alignment Repair Game

3

full deﬁnition of Dynamic Epistemic Ontology Logic (DEOL) and a proof of the
faithfulness of the translation from ARG to DEOL; and a broader discussion of
the signiﬁcance and perspectives of this work.

In the remainder, we discuss the related work (§2) and provide the preliminar-
ies (§3): the Alignment Repair Game (§3.1-3.2) and Dynamic Epistemic Logic (§3.3).
We introduce DEOL (§4), translate ARG states to DEOL models and prove that
this translation is consequence-preserving (§5). Then, we deﬁne the formal prop-
erties of the adaptation operators and use these deﬁnitions to prove that all but
the add operator are correct, thatdelete, addjoin and refine are redundant for
one agent and that all operators are incomplete (§6). We conclude by discussing
the results and giving a perspective on future work (§7).

2 Related Work

In order to accomplish their tasks, agents often maintain a representation of
the world they live in. Using an ontology for that purpose is commonplace. Au-
tonomous agents, developed from diﬀerent sources or learning autonomously, will
naturally have diﬀerent ontologies. This heterogeneity is a problem, in particular
when agents need to communicate about this common environment [25].

Imposing a single universally shared ontology on agents would solve the prob-
lem but at the price of autonomy. It also violates the possibility of keeping part of
the ontology private. It is thus reasonable to consider that not all ontologies have
to be shared.

In consequence, a common method relies on ontology alignments [14] to ensure
agent intelligibility when communicating: alignments express relations between
concepts and relations that allow them to interpret other agents’ messages.

There are many diﬀerent ways in which such alignments have been used. It
is possible to generate alignments beforehand and to use them, it is also possible
to create them or compose them on the ﬂy. Anemone [31] matches ontologies on
the ﬂy when agents need to communicate and cannot express themselves. Agents
will then exchange concept deﬁnitions or concept instances. Other approaches use
argumentation to accept or reject correspondences from a library of alignments [18,
26].

Such techniques consider the obtained alignment as correct and do not consider
modifying or repairing it dynamically. Diﬀerent techniques have been proposed
to evolve alignments: gossiping amongst agents to reach global agreement [1],
logical repair to enforce consistency [19, 16, 22], or prevention of logical violations
to agents’ ontologies via conservativity principles [17]. Some have been integrated
with multi-agent systems via speciﬁc protocols [1, 20].

These repair techniques are developed independently of agent interaction. How-
ever, it may not be realistic nor desirable for agents to stop interacting until the
repair is completed. To overcome this, interaction-situated semantic alignment was
proposed [2]. This is an ontology matching algorithm embedded in the interaction
protocols used by agents to communicate. Alignments are induced depending on
repeated successful interactions and failing interactions lead to revision. This pro-
posal was further advanced to repair alignments through their use and generalized
to less constrained protocols [2, 8, 9, 10].

4

Line van den Berg et al.

The Alignment Repair Game (ARG) [11], taking inspiration from experimental
cultural language evolution [24] may be considered as belonging to this category
of approaches. It lets agents continuously play the game and systematically adapt
their alignments when a failure occurs. ARG has been used to experimentally
show that adaptive agents converge towards successful communication through
local corrective actions [13]. Yet, very little of the formal properties of the ARG
agents or adaptation operators were assessed formally. This is the purpose of the
current work.

3 Preliminaries

In this section, we ﬁrst explain what is needed of ontologies and ontology align-
ments to explain ARG (§3.1). Then we describe the Alignment Repair Game as a
way for agents to evolve alignments (§3.2). Finally we give the syntax and seman-
tics of Dynamic Epistemic Logic (DEL) (§3.3). This logic is the basis for the logic
introduced later in this paper.

ARG may be described in diﬀerent ways. We opted for a simple presenta-
tion that both strictly ﬁts ARG and aligns well with the DEOL translation. This
involved two speciﬁc choices: having a unique namespace for objects, instead of
identifying objects with properties, and having a full network of monodirectional
alignments (ARG alignments).

3.1 Ontologies and alignments

Agents use ontologies to represent their knowledge of the world. An ontology is
based on a signature.

Deﬁnition 1 (Ontology signature) An ontology signature, or signature, is a
pair xC, Dy such that C is a set of class names, with J P C, and D is a set of object
names.

We use uppercase letters (C, D) to denote elements of C and lowercase letters
(o, o1) to denote elements of D. Statements or formulas relate elements of a signa-
ture through relations of subsumption (C Ď D or C Ě D), disjointness (C ‘ D) or
membership (Cpoq). We may say that C is equivalent to D (C ” D) to abbreviate
C Ď D and D Ď C.

An ontology, denoted by O, over a signature, is a set of such statements con-
straining the interpretation of the objects and classes of the signature. Formally,
the ontology can be expressed as a knowledge base in Description Logics [3]. Here
we restrict ourselves to the very simple ontologies manipulated within ARG. They
express the minimum necessary to allow agents to play the game. They do not
consider roles, nor complex classes, and they are organised into dichotomic trees
which may be informally described as follows, given an ontology signature xC, Dy:

– Each class in C is assigned a node in a binary tree rooted at J, whenever a

class C is a child of a class D, then C Ď D P O,

– for every C, D P C, if C and D are siblings then C ‘ D P O,
– for every leaf C of the tree, there exists o P D such that Cpoq P O, and

A Logical Model for the Ontology Alignment Repair Game

5

– each o P D, is attached to a most speciﬁc node C, i.e. Cpoq P O.

This is illustrated by Figure 1. We will consider several agents, named a, b, c, etc.,
each having their own ontologies. We will use subscript to identify the associated
concepts: Oa, Ca, mgcxapC, oq, etc.

Ě

Ě

Ě

Ď

Ja

‘

Oa

Ď

Blacka
Ď Ě
‘

SBa

LBa

W hitea
Ď Ě
‘

SWa

LWa

Jb

‘

Ob

Ě

Largeb
Ď Ě
‘

Smallb
Ď Ě
‘

SSb

T Sb

SLb

T Lb

(cid:4)

(cid:78)

(cid:4) (cid:78) l

(cid:52)

l (cid:52) D

Fig. 1 Two ARG ontologies, Oa on the left and Ob on the right, and an alignment Aab (in
dashed blue) between them. Membership between objects and classes are rendered by dotted
edges. The class names of the leaf classes have an intended use for the agents that use them:
SBa has the intended meaning of being the class, in agent a’s ontology, with all objects that
are both small and black; LWa all objects that are large and white; SSb is the class, in agent
b’s ontology, with all objects that are small and squared; T Lb all objects that are triangular
and large; etc. Of course, these intended uses are not accessible for other agents.

ARG ontologies are formally deﬁned in Deﬁnition 2 on which proofs are based.
Such constraints may be obtained in other ways, but the present ones are suﬃcient
for this paper.

Deﬁnition 2 (ARG ontology) An ARG ontology O over a signature xC, Dy is
a ﬁnite set of axioms following the grammar:

C Ď D | C ‘ D | Cpoq

with C, D P C diﬀerent class names and o P D an object name, such that:

1. @C P C: J Ď C R O,
2. @C P CztJu D!D P C: C Ď D P O,
3. @D P C, either one of the following holds:

– D!xC, C1y P C ˆ C with C Ď D P O, C1 Ď D P O and C ‘ C1 P O, or
– EC P C such that C Ď D P O and Do P D; Dpoq P O.

4. @o P D, D!C P C; Cpoq P O;
5. @C P C, EC0, . . . Cn; @i P r1, ns, Ci Ď Ci´1 P O and C0 “ C “ Cn;
6. O contains no other axiom.

The constraints in Deﬁnition 2 specify that (1) there is a most general class
J, (2) each class, apart from J, has a unique class to which it is subsumed, (3)
all classes either have a unique pair of subclasses that are disjoint, or there is an
object that belongs to it, (4) each object has a unique class to which it belongs,
and (5) there is no cycle.

In the following, the word ‘ontology’ denotes an ARG ontology. Deﬁnition 2
constrains the syntax of ARG ontologies. An interpretation is provided to give
meaning to the elements of the signature.

6

Line van den Berg et al.

Deﬁnition 3 (Ontology Interpretation) Given a signature xC, Dy, an ontology
interpretation I is a tuple I “ x∆, ¨I y such that ∆ is a non-empty domain, a set
of objects, and ¨I is a function assigning to object names o P D an element of the
domain ∆ (¨I : D Ñ ∆), and to class names C P C a subset of ∆ (¨I : C Ñ 2∆),
such that JI “ ∆.

Deﬁnition 4 (Formula Satisﬁability) Let O be an ontology and let I be an
interpretation over its signature, satisﬁability (() is deﬁned as follows:

I ( C Ď D iﬀ C I Ď DI
I ( C ‘ D iﬀ C I X DI “ H

I ( Cpoq iﬀ oI P C I

We may use I ( C Ă D whenever I ( C Ď D but I * C Ě D and I ( C (cid:32) D

whenever I * C ‘ D and say that C and D are overlapping.

As usual, an interpretation satisfying all the axioms of an ontology is called
a model of that ontology; an ontology for which there does not exist a model is
inconsistent; and an ontology O entails a statement φ if all models of the ontology
satisfy this statement (noted O ( φ).

In the case of ARG, ontologies always have models.

Proposition 1 Every ARG ontology is consistent.

This is a good reason for ARG agents to never change their ontologies.

We introduce some notation useful for deﬁning ARG games precisely:

Deﬁnition 5 For any ARG ontology O of signature xC, Dy:

(a) For each class C P CztJu, the most speciﬁc superclass of C is the class D P C

deﬁned by:

O ( C Ă D and @C1 P C : O ( C Ă C1 ñ O ( D Ď C1

It is denoted by mscpCq.

(b) For each object o P D, the most speciﬁc class compatible with o is the class

C P O deﬁned by:

O ( Cpoq and @C1 P C : O ( C1poq ñ O ( C Ď C1

It is denoted by mscpoq.

(c) For each class C P CztJu and for each object o P D, the most speciﬁc superclass

of C compatible with o is D P C deﬁned by:

O ( C Ď D and O ( Dpoq and @C1 P C : O ( C Ď C1^ O ( C1poq ñ O ( D Ď C1

It is denoted by msccpC, oq.

(d) For each class C P C and each object o P D, the set of most general subclasses

of C incompatible with o, is the set deﬁned by:

tD P C | O ( D Ď C, O * Dpoq, @C1 P C : pO ( C1 Ď C^O * C1poqq ñ O ( C1 Ď Du

It is denoted by mgcxpC, oq.

A Logical Model for the Ontology Alignment Repair Game

7

Example 1 (Running example) Considering the ontologies of Figure 1, it can be
observed that:

– mscpSWaq “ W hitea: the most speciﬁc superclass of SWa;
– mscp(cid:52)q “ SWa: the most speciﬁc class of (cid:52);
– msccpBlacka, (cid:52)q “ Ja: the most speciﬁc superclass of Blacka compatible with

(cid:52), and

– mgcxpSmallb, (cid:52)q “ tSSbu: the most general subclasses of Smallb incompatible

with (cid:52).

These concepts are well-deﬁned for ARG ontologies:

Lemma 1 For any ARG ontology O of signature xC, Dy:

(a) For all classes C P CztJu, mscpCq exists and is unique;
(b) For all objects o P D, mscpoq exists and is unique;
(c) For all classes C P CztJu and all objects o P D, msccpC, oq exists and is unique;
(d) For all classes C P C and all objects o P D, mgcxpC, oq exists and is unique.

Because agents use diﬀerent vocabularies in their ontologies, they face prob-
lems when trying to communicate: how do they understand each other if they
express their knowledge in diﬀerent ways? Alignments are tools that allow agents
to translate their knowledge with respect to the ontology of other agents, enabling
them to communicate with each other [14].

Deﬁnition 6 (Ontology Alignment) An alignment Aab Ď Ca ˆ Cb ˆ tĎ, Ěu
between two ontologies Oa and Ob over signatures xCa, Day and xCb, Dby is a set
of correspondences xCa, Cb, Ry where Ca and Cb are class names belonging to Ca
and Cb, respectively, and R P tĎ, Ěu.

We also write CaRCb P Aab for xCa, Cb, Ry P Aab. In this paper, alignments
are shared between the involved agents and we consider here that class names are
all disjoint (Ca X Cb “ H) but object names are the same (Da “ Db “ D).

The semantics for alignments used here is called the reduced semantics [14].
This semantics selects the pairs of models of each ontologies that satisfy the align-
ments.

However, in ARG, an agent is only aware of the constraints on her ontology.
She will thus interpret alignments only with respect to her ontology. For instance,
if xC, D, Ěy P Aab, C Ď C1 P Oa and D1 Ď D P Ob, then Aab and both ontologies
Oa and Ob entail C1 Ě D1. However, the agents cannot access the other agents’
ontologies. This still means that agent a can deduce, from Oa and Aab that C1 Ě D
(resp. b can deduce that C Ě D1 from Ob and Aab). Hence we deﬁne the notion of
local entailment that only one of the agents has access to.

Deﬁnition 7 (Local Correspondence Satisﬁability) Given two ontologies Oa
and Ob and an interpretation I “ x∆, ¨I y of Oa. The interpretation I locally
satisﬁes a correspondence between C P Ca and D P Cb (noted (a) as follows:

I (a C Ď D iﬀ C I 1
I (a C Ě D iﬀ C I 1

Ď DI 1
Ě DI 1

such that ¨I 1

is an extension of ¨I to Ca Y Cb.

8

Line van den Berg et al.

The deﬁnition can be rewritten for covering how b interprets Aab.

As usual, a local model of an alignment for an ontology O is a model of O
an extension of which locally satisﬁes all the correspondences of the alignment,
and a local model of an ontology O for an set of alignments L is a model of O
an extension of which locally satisﬁes all the correspondences in all alignments
in L. An alignment is locally consistent if it has a local model (otherwise locally
inconsistent), an ontology is locally consistent for a set of alignments L if it has
a local model for L, and a correspondence γ is locally entailed for agent a by an
alignment A if it is satisﬁed in all of its local models (noted A (a γ).

Even such a restricted deﬁnition allows for agents to ﬁnd out that there is no
model compatible with an alignment. Consider for instance, tCpoq, C ‘ C1u Ď Oa
and txC, D, Ďy, xC1, D, Ěyu Ď Aab, there can be no extension to Cb of a model of
Oa satisfying both correspondences. This is a good reason why agents may want
to repair them.

We split the alignments used in ARG into two distinct alignments using only
the Ě relation. Any network of alignments may be rewritten with such conventions
[12]. Moreover, the alignments have to follow speciﬁc constraints allowing to always
ﬁnd a single correspondence applicable for an object.

Deﬁnition 8 (ARG alignment) An alignment Aab Ď Ca ˆ Cb ˆ tĚu between
two ARG ontologies Oa and Ob, is an ARG alignment if
– xJa, Jb, Ěy P Aab,
– for each class D P Cb there is at most one class C P Ca such that xC, D, Ěy P Aab.

Globally, we will consider as ARG states speciﬁc networks of aligned ontologies.

Deﬁnition 9 (ARG State) An ARG state s, for a set A of agents, is the pair
s “ xtOauaPA, tAabua,bPA,a‰by, such that
– Oa is an ARG ontology associated to agent a P A;
– Aab is an ARG alignment between Oa and Ob.

An ARG state is said locally consistent for a set of agents A if it is locally
consistent for each agent in A. We will say that an ARG state is globally consistent
if there exists a tuple xIayaPA of models for each ontology Oa which satisﬁes all
the correspondences of all alignments [12].

3.2 Alignment Repair Game

The Alignment Repair Game (ARG) is a protocol designed for adaptive agents to
evolve alignments between their ontologies through their use [11, 13]. The aim of
ARG is to detect and repair mistakes in alignments whenever a communication
failure occurs through application of the adaptation operators. The idea is that
ultimately, by repeatedly playing ARG, the alignments will not cause failure any
more.

Deﬁnition 10 (Alignment Repair Game) The Alignment Repair Game is
played a ﬁxed number of rounds from an initial ARG state by a set of agents A
with a common set D of object names from an ARG state s and for a chosen
operator.

At each round of the game:

A Logical Model for the Ontology Alignment Repair Game

9

1. Two agents a, b P A with a ‰ b and an object o P D are picked at random.
2. Agent a asks agent b to which class in her ontology the object o belongs ac-
cording to the alignment Aab. Agent b answers the most speciﬁc class Cb that
is identiﬁed via: Ob ( Cbpoq, xCa, Cb, Ěy P Aab, and EC1
b ‰ Cb such that
xC1

b, Ěy P Aab and Ob ( C1

b Ď Cb.

a, C1

3. Agent a compares Ca with the object o. If Oa ( Capoq, then the round is a
success, else if Oa * Capoq the round is a failure and an adaptation operator
αrxCa, Cb, Ěy, os is applied to the alignment Aab.

As an illustration of one ARG round consider Example 2 that will serve as a

running example throughout this paper.

Example 2 (Running example) Let agent a and agent b play ARG where their
ontologies Oa and Ob are described in Figure 1.

The initial alignment Aab is represented by the blue dashed correspondences
between classes of their ontologies. Now, consider two cases: the object (cid:78) and the
object (cid:52). Let in both cases agent a ask agent b to which class the object belongs
in her ontology so that it can be translated to Oa via the alignment. In both cases,
agent b will answer Smallb as both objects belong to this class in Ob. However,
while for the object (cid:78) the round would be successful (because Oa ( Blackap(cid:78)q), for
the object (cid:52) a failure is reached (because Oa ( W hiteap(cid:52)q ^ W hitea ‘ Blacka). In
the latter case an adaptation operator αrxBlacka, Smallb, Ěy, (cid:52)s has to be applied
to the alignment Aab (see Example 3).

The agent behaviour, in this version of the game, is fully deterministic: given
the ordered structure of the ontology and the uniqueness of the eligible correspon-
dence in ARG alignments (granted by Deﬁnition 8), the agent does not choose the
correspondence to apply.

Adaptation operators specify, given the failure of correspondence xCa, Cb, Ěy P

Aab with object o, what the agents should do.

Deﬁnition 11 (Adaptation Operator) An adaptation operator α is an align-
ment transformer αrc, os : Aab ÞÑ A1
ab are alignments, c P Aab
and o is an object.

ab where Aab and A1

We also write α for αrc, os whenever c and o are clear from the context.
In [11, 13] the following adaptation operators αrxCa, Cb, Ěy, os are introduced:

– deleterxCa, Cb, Ěy, os: delete the correspondence xCa, Cb, Ěy from Aab;
– addrxCa, Cb, Ěy, os: in addition to deleterxCa, Cb, Ěy, os, add the correspon-
dence xmscapCaq, Cb, Ěy between Cb and the most speciﬁc superclass of Ca;
– addjoinrxCa, Cb, Ěy, os: in addition to deleterxCa, Cb, Ěy, os, add the corre-
spondence xmsccapo, Caq, Cb, Ěy between Cb and the most speciﬁc superclass
of Ca that is compatible with the object o;

– refinerxCa, Cb, Ěy, os: in addition to deleterxCa, Cb, Ěy, os, adds the corre-
b of
bpoq) and which do

spondences xCa, C1
Cb that are not compatible with the object o (i.e. Ob * C1
not already have a correspondence xC1

b, Ěy between Ca and all the most general subclasses C1

b, Ěy P Aab;

a, C1

– refaddrxCa, Cb, Ěy, os: the combination of the operators addjoinrxCa, Cb, Ě

y, os and refinerxCa, Cb, Ěy, os.

10

Line van den Berg et al.

Formally, this amounts to:

deleterxCa, Cb, Ěy, ospAabq “ AabztxCa, Cb, Ěyu

addrxCa, Cb, Ěy, ospAabq “ deleterxCa, Cb, Ěy, ospAabq Y txmscapCaq, Cb, Ěyu
addjoinrxCa, Cb, Ěy, ospAabq “ deleterxCa, Cb, Ěy, ospAabq Y txmsccapo, Caq, Cb Ěyu
refinerxCa, Cb, Ěy, ospAabq “ deleterxCa, Cb, Ěy, ospAabq

b, Ěy P Aabu
refaddrxCa, Cb, Ěy, ospAabq “ addjoinrxCa, Cb, Ěy, ospAabq Y refinerxCa, Cb, Ěy, ospAabq

b P mgcxbpCb, oq and EC1

Y txCa, C1

b, Ěy|C1

a; xC1

a, C1

As can be observed, some of the actions (add, addjoin) can only be performed
by agent a, who is the only one to know Oa, and some others (refine) can only be
performed by agent b, for symmetric reasons. Hence, the implementation of these
operators involves a gently asking b for performing refine, and part of refadd,
upon failure. Example 3 illustrates the application of these operators.

Example 3 (Running example) In the situation reached at the end of Example 2
with object (cid:52), an adaptation operator αrxBlacka, Smallb, Ěy, (cid:52)s is applied to the
alignment Aab, deleting the initial correspondence and adding the following new
correspondences to the alignment:

– delete: none
– add: xJa, Smallb, Ěy
– addjoin: xJa, Smallb, Ěy
– refine: xBlacka, SSb, Ěy
– refadd: xJa, Smallb, Ěy and xBlacka, SSb, Ěy

(mscapBlackaq “ Ja)
(msccap(cid:52), Blackaq “ Ja)
(msccbpSmallb, (cid:52)q “ SSb)

From the deﬁnition, every operator entails delete and refadd entails addjoin
and refine. The order of the actions that are performed by the adaptation oper-
ators does not matter. Figure 2 illustrates the eﬀect of the adaptation operators.

Ja
Ď Ě
‘

Ě (add)

Ě (addjoin)

Jb

Ď

Ď
Da

Ě

Ca

Ě

Ě (refine)

Ď
Cb
Ď Ě
‘
Db

Fig. 2 Schematic diagram of the deleted (red, solid) and added correspondences (green and
dashed for add, green and dash-dotted for addjoin, blue and dotted for refine) by the diﬀerent
adaptation operators in ARG.

o

The alignment repair game modiﬁes the situation from ARG state to ARG

state, as expressed by Property 1.

A Logical Model for the Ontology Alignment Repair Game

11

Property 1 (Operators preserve ARG stateness) Given an ARG state s and a fail-
ure of correspondence c on object o, then αrc, ospsq is well-deﬁned and is an ARG
state, for each operator α P tdelete, add, addjoin, refine, refaddu.

For an ARG state s “ xtOauaPA, tAabua,bPAy, we also write αrxCa, Cb, Ry, ospsq
for xtOauaPA, tAxyux,yPAzta,bu YtαrxCa, Cb, Ry, ospAabqu. Again, whenever the cor-
respondence and object are clear from the context, we also simply write αpsq.

By playing ARG with diﬀerent operators, they can be compared. In [11, 13],
the operators are compared experimentally in terms of success rate (ratio of suc-
cesses over rounds played), semantic precision and recall with respect to the known
correct reference alignment (the degree of correctness and completeness of the re-
sulting alignment) and convergence (the number of rounds needed to converge).
It was found that all the operators have a relatively high success rate, yet do not
reach 100% precision, and that recall and convergence both increases with opera-
tors that add new correspondences. The operator refadd, followed by add, shows
the highest semantic recall and add, the slowest convergence.

In order to study the formal properties of ARG adaptation operators, we in-

troduce dynamic epistemic logics.

3.3 Dynamic Epistemic Logic

Dynamic Epistemic Logics (DEL) are a family of modal logics describing informa-
tion ﬂow in multi-agent systems. DEL has been widely used as a formal framework
to model agent communication [21, 29, 34], belief revision [27] and agent interac-
tion [28]. As such, it provides a solid basis to study knowledge and belief evolution
of logical agents playing ARG. Here we consider the syntax and semantics intro-
duced by [4].

Deﬁnition 12 (Syntax of DEL) The syntax, LDEL, of (multi-agent) DEL is
deﬁned in the following way:

φ ::“ p | φ ^ ψ | (cid:32)φ | Kaφ | Baφ | r†φsψ

where p P P is a proposition, Ka and Ba are the knowledge and belief operators
for each agent a and †φ with † P t!, Òu the dynamic upgrades.

The connectives _ and Ñ, and the duals ˆKa, ˆBa, x†φy are deﬁned in the usual
way: φ _ ψ iﬀ (cid:32)p(cid:32)φ ^ (cid:32)ψq, φ Ñ ψ iﬀ (cid:32)φ _ ψ, ˆKaφ “ (cid:32)Ka(cid:32)φ, ˆBaφ “ (cid:32)Ba(cid:32)φ,
and x†φy “ (cid:32)r†φs(cid:32)ψ. DEL models are based on Kripke frames with plausibility
relations where the dynamic modalities act as model transformers.

Deﬁnition 13 (DEL Model) A model of (multi-agent) DEL is a triple M “
xW, pěaqaPA, V y where

– W is a non-empty set of worlds;
– pěaqaPA Ď W ˆ W are the plausibility relations on W , one for each agent, that

are converse well-founded, locally connected preorders;

– and V is a propositional valuation mapping propositions to sets of worlds in

which that proposition is true.

12

Line van den Berg et al.

The plausibility relation w ěa v reads as “w is at least as plausible as v for
agent a” and the epistemic and doxastic relations are deﬁned on W accordingly:

w „a v iﬀ w pďa Y ěaq v

(1)

w Ña v iﬀ v P M axďa |w|a
(2)
where |w|a is the information cell (or accessible cell ) of agent a at state w and is
deﬁned by:

|w|a “ tv P W | w „a vu

(3)
It follows from the properties of ďa and ěa that the relations „a are reﬂexive,
transitive and symmetric, and the relations Ña are transitive, serial and Euclidean.
Therefore they satisfy the usual properties of knowledge and belief, respectively [7,
34].

Satisﬁability is considered with respect to a pointed model xM, wy which as-

sociates a DEL model M with a world w.

Deﬁnition 14 (Satisﬁability for DEL) Satisﬁability for DEL by a pointed
model xM, wy is deﬁned in the following way:

M, w ( p
M, w ( φ ^ ψ
M, w ( (cid:32)φ
M, w ( Kaφ
M, w ( Baφ

M, w ( r!φsψ

M, w ( rÒφsψ

iﬀ w P V ppq
iﬀ M, w ( φ and M, w ( ψ
iﬀ M, w * φ
iﬀ @v s.t. w „a v : M, v ( φ
iﬀ @v s.t. w Ña v : M, v ( φ
iﬀ M!φ, w ( ψ
iﬀ MÒφ, w ( ψ

where !φ and Òφ are model transformers !φ : M Ñ M!φ and Òφ : M Ñ MÒφ with
||φ||M “ tw P W | M, w ( φu such that
Announcement (!φ) Delete all ‘(cid:32)φ’-worlds from the model, i.e. W !φ “ ||φ||M,

w ě!φ

a v iﬀ w ěa v and w, v P W !φ, V !φppq “ V ppq X ||φ||M;

Conservative upgrade (Ò φ) Change the plausibility orders so that the best ‘φ’-
worlds become better than all other worlds, while the old ordering on the rest of
the worlds remains, i.e. W Òφ “ W , w ěÒφ
a v iﬀ either w P M axďa p|v|a X ||φ||Mq
or w ěa v, V Òφppq “ V ppq.
1φ; †
2ψ is equal to pM†

2ψ for the sequence of upgrades †
†
2ψ.
1φq

We also write †
1φ;†
model M†

2ψ. The resulting

1φ and then †

The intuition behind the diﬀerent upgrades is that the trustworthiness of the
information source may vary: it may be considered from an infallible source (an-
nouncements), or from a trusted, but not infallible source (conservative upgrades).
For this reason, conservative upgrades only change the plausibility of worlds with-
out deleting any alternatives. This also means that an announcement !φ can only
be validly performed on a model M if φ is true there. Since the worlds do not
change, it is not necessary to apply the announcements to w when interpreting
them.

A set of formulas is said inconsistent if there does not exist a pointed model
satisfying it. In the following, we say that a formula φ is a consequence of a set of
formulas Γ (written Γ ( φ) if every pointed model xM, wy satisfying all formulas
of Γ , also satisfy φ.

A Logical Model for the Ontology Alignment Repair Game

13

4 Dynamic Epistemic Ontology Logic

Dynamic Epistemic Logic (DEL) is the study of epistemic, or more generally
modal, logics that are subjected to model-transforming actions. Modelling the
communication taking place in ARG requires a similar approach. Here, we intro-
duce Dynamic Epistemic Ontology Logic (DEOL) that is an extension of Dynamic
Epistemic Logic where the propositions are object classiﬁcations (Cpxq) and class
relations (C Ď D and C ‘ D) of a Description Logic language. This is a minimal
Description Logic language, suitable for representing ARG states.

Deﬁnition 15 (Syntax of DEOL) The syntax, LDEOL, of (multi-agent) DEOL
is deﬁned in the following way:

φ ::“ Cpoq | CRD | φ ^ ψ | (cid:32)φ | Kaφ | Baφ | r†φsψ

R P tĎ, Ě, ‘u, † P t!, Òu

where C, D, J P C, o P D, Ka and Ba are the knowledge and belief operators for
agent a and †φ with † P t!, Òu are the dynamic upgrades.

The connectives Ñ and _ and the duals ˆKa, ˆBa, x†φy for Ka, Ba and r†φs,

respectively, are deﬁned as in the case for DEL.

The diﬀerence with DEL models is that instead of a valuation of propositions,
we consider a domain of interpretation ∆ representing the objects and an inter-
pretation function I assigning to each world a function interpreting each class as
a set of objects of the domain.

Deﬁnition 16 (DEOL Model) A model of (multi-agent) DEOL is a quadruple
M “ xW, pěaqaPA, ∆, Iy where

– W is the set of states, or worlds;
– pěaqaPA Ď W ˆ W are the plausibility relations on W , one for each agent, that

are converse well-founded, locally connected preorders;

– ∆ is the domain of interpretation;
– and I is an interpretation function such that Ipwq “ ¨Iw and ¨Iw : C Ñ Pp∆q,

where it holds that JIw “ ∆.

The semantics of DEOL is equivalent to that of DEL except that we now
have instance classiﬁcations Cpoq and class relations C Ď D and C ‘ D that are
interpreted by I.

Deﬁnition 17 (Satisﬁability for DEOL) Satisﬁability for DEOL extends that
of DEL (Deﬁnition 14), with an interpretation function I instead of the valuation
V , by:

M, w ( Cpoq

M, w ( C Ď D

M, w ( C ‘ D

iﬀ oIw P C Iw
iﬀ C Iw Ď DIw
iﬀ C Iw X DIw “ H

14

Line van den Berg et al.

Notice that, again, we use M, w ( C (cid:32) D and say that “C and D overlap”

whenever M, w * C ‘ D, i.e. whenever C Iw X DIw ‰ H.

As for DEL, a formula φ is a consequence of a set of formulas Γ (written Γ ( φ)

if every pointed model xM, wy satisfying all formulas of Γ , also satisfy φ.

DEOL can be seen as a general purpose extension of DEL that could be used
to model other games. However, it has been designed to apply to ARG, hence it
may require further extensions.

5 Translation

In the previous section, we have introduced Dynamic Epistemic Ontology Logic as
a formal framework for knowledge and belief evolution in multi-agent systems that
make use of ontologies. We now apply this framework to the Alignment Repair
Game. More precisely, we deﬁne a translation from ARG states to DEOL theories
(§5.1) and from adaptation operators for ARG to dynamic upgrades on DEOL
(§5.2), see Figure 3. These translations are labeled by τ and δ, respectively.

This enables us to deﬁne and prove the correctness, redundancy and complete-

ness of the adaptation operators in the remainder of this paper.

ARG state (s)

α

ARG state (αpsq)

τ

δ

τ

DEOL theory (τ psq)

δpαq

DEOL theory (τ pαpsqq)

Fig. 3 The translation from ARG states (s) to DEOL theories (τ ) and from adaptation
operators (α) to dynamic upgrades (δ).

5.1 Translation of ARG states as epistemic axioms

To translate an ARG state to DEOL, we translate the axioms of each agent’s on-
tology as knowledge for this agent and each correspondence of alignments between
two agents’ ontologies as beliefs shared by both agents.

Deﬁnition 18 (Translation τ ) The translation τ from ARG states to DEOL
theories is deﬁned by:

τ pxtOauaPA, tAabua,bPAyq “

tKapφq|φ P Oau

ď

aPA
ď

Y

tBapγq ^ Bbpγq|γ P Aabu

a,bPA

Example 4 (Running example) In the running example, this means that the ax-
ioms SSb Ď Smallb, Smallb Ď Jb, T Sbp(cid:78)q, etc, of ontology Ob become KbpSSb Ď
Smallbq, KbpSmallb Ď Jbq, KbpT Sbp(cid:78)qq, etc., in DEOL and the correspondences

A Logical Model for the Ontology Alignment Repair Game

15

xBlacka, Smallb, Ěy, xJa, Jb, Ěy of the alignment Aab and xJb, Ja, Ěy of Aba be-
come BapBlacka Ě Smallbq ^ BbpBlacka Ě Smallbq, BapJa Ě Jbq ^ BbpJa Ě Jbq
and BapJa Ď Jbq ^ BbpJa Ď Jbq.

Figure 4 depicts the theory τ psq from the perspective of agent a. That is, any

φ such that Kaφ is drawn in black, and any γ such that Baγ is drawn in blue.

Ď

Jb

Ď

Ď

Smallb
(cid:32)(cid:52)

‘

Ď, Ě

Ď

Blacka
Ď Ě
‘

LBa

SBa
(cid:78)

Ja

‘

Oa

Ě

W hitea
Ď Ě
‘

LWa

SWa
(cid:52)

‘

‘

Fig. 4 Initial knowledge (solid black lines) and belief (dashed blue lines) of agent a in the
Running example.

5.1.1 Faithfulness

Before we discuss the translation of the adaptation operators, a natural question
to ask is: is the translation of an ARG state faithful to this ARG state? More
precisely, can anything entailed independently from an ontology or an alignment
also be entailed by the transformation as knowledge and beliefs of the agent? If
the answer is yes, the translation is consequence preserving.

Proposition 2 (Consequence preservation) Let s be an ARG state for a set
of agents A, then, for each agent a P A,

and

@φ :

if Oa ( φ then τ psq ( Kaφ

@γ :

if Aab (a γ then τ psq ( Baγ

(4)

(5)

where the left-hand ( concerns entailment by ontologies and alignments (where (a
is entailment restricted to agent a) and the right-hand ( concerns entailment in
DEOL.

Consequence preservation is formulated in this way, in two equations and agent
by agent, because this is the way that the ARG agents use information: they never
consider several alignments at once or the ontologies of other agents. No global
reasoning is possible to them.

16

Line van den Berg et al.

Proposition 2 shows that the translation preserves, modulo modalities, the
information that agents have. Given the structure of the translation, it does not
seem to introduce arbitrary information. But do the reverse of these statements,
let us call them strict adherence, hold?

Let us ﬁrst consider the reverse of Equation 4. Whenever τ psq has a model, i.e.
whenever it is consistent, it seems natural that this should hold. However, there
are cases where τ psq does not have a model – so that anything can be deduced –
but the ontologies are consistent – so that not everything can be deduced. This
occurs, in particular, when ARG states are locally inconsistent.

Moreover, the converse also holds: whenever τ psq has a model, then s must be

locally consistent.

Proposition 3 (Local consistence preservation) Let s be an ARG state for
a set of agents A. Then τ psq has a model if and only if s is locally consistent.

Figure 5 shows how we can build a DEOL model xMs, wsy for a locally con-
sistent ARG state s with three agents. Essentially, the way to construct Ms is
to create a world that satisﬁes all the ontologies (this is well-deﬁned because the
classes of the ontologies are disjoint) and for each agent a more plausible world
that satisﬁes her own ontology and alignments. The latter is achieved through,
for each agent a P A, choosing the interpretation at this more plausible world to
be an interpretation of Oa locally satisfying all the alignments of a. Then indeed,
each agent knows her own ontology (it is true in all her accessible worlds, the two
worlds on top for agent a) and believes her alignments (they are true in the most
plausible world, the world on top right for agent a).

A

IA

b

I 1
b

A

I 1
a

A

a

c

I 1
c

A

Fig. 5 A model of the ARG state with three agents, A “ ta, b, cu. We write IA as abbreviation
for the interpretation that assigns to classes C P Ca and objects of D the standard interpretation
Ia (Deﬁnition 25) for agent a.

Thus, local consistency is preserved from ARG to DEOL and vice versa and
there is a procedure to construct a DEOL model of a locally consistent ARG state
s such that it satisﬁes τ psq. Note that in case of locally consistent but globally
inconsistent state, it is possible for the DEOL translation to have a model. Consider
Example 5.

Example 5 Let s be the ARG state depicted in Figure 6 with three agents a, b and
c and their individual ontologies and alignments. It is clear that the alignments are
locally consistent, but not globally: combining the alignments we arrive at C1 Ě A1
and C Ě A1, whereas C ‘ C1 and none of these classes can be empty. However,

A Logical Model for the Ontology Alignment Repair Game

17

since the alignments are locally consistent, there exists a model by Proposition 3.
And indeed, this is true because the alignments are private and hence each agent
only has access to the alignments in which that agent is involved. To illustrate,
agent a only has access to the blue and red alignments, but not green, in Figure 6,
agent b to the blue and green ones and agent c to the red and green ones.

Ď
Ě

Ď

Ď

A

Ě

Ja

‘

Oa

Ď

A1

Ě

Ě

Ď

C

Jc

‘

Oc

Ě

C1

Ď

B

Jb

‘

Ob

Ě

B1

Ď

Ě

Ě

Fig. 6 The ontologies (black) of agent a (left), agent b (right) and agent c (below) and the
alignments (blue, red or green, and dashed) between them that is globally inconsistent.

In that sense, DEOL is very faithful to the ARG agents who do not perform

any global reasoning.

Whenever τ psq has a model, the reverse of Equation 4 holds. We call this strict
knowledge adherence: all knowledge of an agent is already entailed by her ontology.

Proposition 4 (Strict knowledge adherence) Let s be an ARG state locally
consistent for a set of agents A, then, for each agent a P A,

@φ : if τ psq ( Kaφ then Oa ( φ

(6)

where the ﬁrst ( concerns entailment by DEOL and the second ( concerns entail-
ment by ontologies.

Yet, the reverse for beliefs and alignments, Equation 5, does not hold. This is
because, on DEOL, agents may combine beliefs that are acquired from diﬀerent
alignments to arrive at a new belief of a correspondence between two classes that
both belong to other agents’ ontologies and not their own. On ARG, however,
agents consider alignments one by one and do not combine the correspondences.
Hence some beliefs entailed by the translation may not be entailed by the align-
ment. Consider Example 6.

Example 6 Let s be the ARG state in Figure 6 with

Aab “ txJa, Jb, Ěyu

Abc “ txJb, Jc, Ěyu

Aac “ txJa, Jc, Ěyu

Aba “ txB, A1, Ěy, xJb, Ja, Ěyu
Acb “ txC1, B, Ěy, xJc, Jb, Ěyu
Aca “ txC, A1, Ěy, xJc, Ja, Ěyu

18

Line van den Berg et al.

Then τ psq ( BbpB Ě A1q and τ psq ( BbpC1 Ě Bq, so that τ psq ( BbpC1 Ě A1q. But
it is clear that Aba *b C1 Ě A1 nor Acb *b C1 Ě A1 because A1, C1 R Cb.

In summary, the translated ARG states are faithful to the initial ARG state
with the diﬀerence that agents in DEOL reason globally on agent alignments. This
is present in both the restriction of using locally consistent states and the absence
of strict belief adherence

Now that we have a faithful translation of ARG states to DEOL theories, we

consider translating the adaptation operators.

5.2 Translation of adaptation operators as dynamic upgrades

During the gameplay of ARG, agents communicate with each other and through
their communication, they learn new information. From a DEL standpoint, there
are two dynamic acts involved: the communication of Cbpoq in step 2 of ARG and
the adaptation operator applied in step 3 of ARG (see Deﬁnition 10). With a
formal model of ARG, we can now ask the question: how do these acts change the
knowledge and beliefs of the agents in the DEOL representation of ARG? And are
the adaptation operators as deﬁned suﬃcient and complete to account for these
changes?

In order to answer these questions, we translate the communication taking
place in ARG, the adaptation operators, to dynamic upgrades on DEOL (accord-
ing to Figure 3). That is, one round of ARG, as deﬁned in Deﬁnition 10 with
adaptation operator α applied to correspondence CaRCb and object o, is a the-
ory transformation δpαrxCa, Cb, Ěy, osq adding axioms for the communication that
occurs.

Deﬁnition 19 (ARG Dynamics in DEOL) Let T “ τ psq be the DEOL theory
that is the translation of an ARG state s. Then δpαrxCa, Cb, Ěy, osq : T Ñ T 1 is
a theory transformation, with adaptation operator α, correspondence xCa, Cb, Ěy
and object o, where T 1 is deﬁned as:

#

T 1 :“

T Y tr!CbpoqsJu
T Y tr!CbpoqsJ,

‰
“
dpαrxCa, Cb, Ěy, osq
Ju

if Oa ( Capoq
if Oa * Capoq

where dpαrxCa, Cb, Ěy, osq is a conservative upgrade of the correspondence deleted
or added by the adaptation operator α applied to xCa, Cb, Ěy with object o (see
Deﬁnition 20). We will also write dpαq whenever the correspondence and object
are clear from the context.

In the following we will also write T δpαq for the transformation δpαq applied to

T or simply T !Cbpoq (T !Cbpoq,dpαq, respectively).

On a DEOL model M of T , the dynamic upgrades deﬁned above (Deﬁnition 19)
act as model transformations !Cbpoq and !Cbpoq; dpαrxCa, Cb, Ěy, osq, respectively,
where the latter is a sequence of upgrades applying ﬁrst !Cbpoq to M followed by
dpαrxCa, Cb, Ěy, osq. Thus, M is transformed to pM!CbpoqqdpαrxCa,Cb,Ěy,osq.

The choice of the translation for the adaptation operators as logical dynamics
is quite natural: it is based on the order of dynamic acts on ARG and the trust-
worthyness of the statements. In ARG, ﬁrst communication occurs and then belief

A Logical Model for the Ontology Alignment Repair Game

19

reorganisation. Cbpoq, which is communicated in step 2 of the game (Deﬁnition 10)
by agent b, is known to agent b because this is part of her ontology. This means
that announcing Cbpoq is performed in complete conﬁdence – it is hard informa-
tion, a fact – and therefore agent a has no reason to doubt about it. Then, the
adaptation operator dpαrxCa, Cb, Ěy, osq is applied as a belief revision strategy. It
speciﬁes how to revise the alignment, which the agents believe to be true, upon a
communication failure. But compared to the statement Cbpoq, the correspondence
added by the adaptation operator is not necessarily correct and may prove to be
incorrect at a later stage of the game upon reaching a new communication fail-
ure. Therefore the corresponding DEOL upgrade for this correspondence is not an
announcement but a conservative upgrade – it is soft information, a belief.

Deﬁnition 20 (Adaptation Operators as Dynamic Upgrades) Let a cor-
respondence xCa, Cb, Ěy, an object o, and an adaptation operator α, then dpαq is
deﬁned as:

dpdeleteq “ Ò p(cid:32)pCa Ě Cbqq

dpaddq “ Ò p(cid:32)pCa Ě Cbq ^ mscapCaq Ě Cbq
dpaddjoinq “ Ò p(cid:32)pCa Ě Cbq ^ msccapo, Caq Ě Cbq
Ca Ě C1
bq

dprefineq “ Ò p(cid:32)pCa Ě Cbq ^

ľ

dprefaddq “ Ò p(cid:32)pCa Ě Cbq ^ msccapo, Caq Ě Cb ^

C1

bPMbpCb,oq

ľ

Ca Ě C1
bq

C1

bPMbpCb,oq

where MbpCb, oq “ tC1

b P mgcxbpCb, oq | ExC1

a, C1

b, Ěy P Aabu.

In the following, we also write Ca Ğ Cb for (cid:32)pCa Ě Cbq.
Again, as was the case for the adaptation operators on ARG states, the trans-
lated adaptation operators dpaddq, dpaddjoinq, dprefineq and dprefaddq entail
dpdeleteq, and the translated adaptation operator dprefaddq entails dpaddjoinq
and dprefineq. This can be seen directly from Deﬁnition 20.

Example 7 (Running example - Success) When ARG is played with (cid:78), agent b
announces that !Smallbp(cid:78)q and the correspondence used is xBlacka, Smallb, Ěy P
Aab. This information is compatible with the information of agent a: Blacka is
compatible with SBa, i.e. the most speciﬁc class of (cid:78).

Compared to ARG where the round is now ﬁnished, there are additional
epistemic-doxastic changes on the corresponding DEOL model. The announce-
ment carries more information than just indicating that the round of ARG was a
success, it provides agent a with new knowledge: KapSmallbp(cid:78)qq. In other words,
agent a is now given concrete evidence that (cid:78) is a member of Smallb. Figure 4 can
be compared to Figure 7 for an overview of the changes to the epistemic-doxastic
state of agent a.

Example 8 (Running example - Failure) If instead ARG is played with (cid:52), the
round is a failure. Agent b announces !Smallap(cid:52)q using the same correspondence
xBlacka, Smallb, Ěy P Aab. However, this information contradicts the knowledge
of agent a and, as a result, the correspondence (belief) of the alignment will be
dropped.

20

Line van den Berg et al.

Jb

Ď

Ď

Ď

Smallb
(cid:78) (cid:32) (cid:52)

‘

Ď, Ě

Ď

Blacka
Ď Ě
‘

LBa

SBa
(cid:78)

Ja

‘

Oa

Ě

W hitea
Ď Ě
‘

LWa

SWa
(cid:52)

‘

‘

Fig. 7 The knowledge (solid black) and belief (dashed blue) of agent a of Example 2 after
the announcement !Smallbp(cid:78)q.

However, this is not the only revised belief. The contradicted initial beliefs
turn into knowledge of their negation. For example, Bap(cid:32)Smallbp(cid:52)qq becomes
KapSmallbp(cid:52)qq after the announcement. Compare also Figure 4 and Figure 8 for
an overview of the changes to the epistemic-doxastic state of agent a.

According to ARG, an adaptation operator is applied, which results in an
updated alignment as explained in Example 3. These correspondences should be
amongst the beliefs of the agents at the end of the round of ARG. However, for
some operators, the correspondences were already believed by agent a before the
adaptation operator is applied. We will see why in the next section.

(cid:32)

Ď, Ě

Jb

Ď

Ď

Ď

Smallb
(cid:78) (cid:52)

Ę

Blacka
Ď Ě
‘

LBa

SBa
(cid:78)

Ja

‘

Oa

Ě

W hitea
Ď Ě
‘

LWa

SWa
(cid:52)

(cid:32)

‘

Fig. 8 The knowledge (solid black) and belief (dashed blue) of agent a of Example 2 after
the announcement !Smallbp(cid:52)q.

A Logical Model for the Ontology Alignment Repair Game

21

The drawback of modelling the operators as announcements and conservative
upgrades is that they are model transformers and that therefore, when the ARG
state has no model in DEOL, the transformation yields no model. On the contrary,
in ARG, agents blindly apply operators without bothering about local or global
inconsistency. Experiments went as far as showing that a slightly improved version
of ARG (with relaxation) brings agents to a fully consistent state even when
starting with an inconsistent one [13]. This is not possible in the DEOL translation
because it is restricted to consistent states.

6 Formal properties of the Adaptation Operators

With the formal representation of ARG in DEOL we can explore the correctness,
redundancy and completeness of the operators. In particular, we show that all
the adaptation operators but add are correct, delete, addjoin and refine are
partially redundant and all adaptation operators are incomplete. To visualize this,
we use the diagram in Figure 3.

6.1 Correctness

To show that the adaptation operators are correct, we show that the diagram of
Figure 3 commutes. More precisely, that, from an ARG state s, by moving down
(α) and then right (τ ) we obtain DEOL axioms that are also obtained by moving
ﬁrst right (τ ) and then down (δpαq).

Deﬁnition 21 (Correctness) An adaptation operator α is correct if and only if
@s: pτ psqqδpαq ( τ pαpsqq.

Proposition 5 (Correctness) The adaptation operators delete, addjoin, refine
and refadd are correct.

Yet, the adaptation operator add is not correct because it does not take into
account whether the most speciﬁc superclass of Ca is consistent with the object
o. Moreover, if it is consistent, add is equivalent to addjoin.

Proposition 6 (Incorrectness of add) The adaptation operator α “ add is in-
correct, i.e. Ds : pτ psqqδpaddq * τ paddpsqq, and @s such that pτ psqqδpaddq ( τ paddpsqq:
addpsq “ addjoinpsq.

Proposition 6 is in line with initial predictions and experimental results [13]:
addjoin shows faster convergence to the same result than add. This is because
add can force false correspondences to be added to the alignment that can later
cause a failure. From these results, it is clear that for a logical agent, add should
be abandoned.

22

6.2 Redundancy

Line van den Berg et al.

The redundancy of some operators in the running example is not a coincidence.
For logical agents, i.e. DEOL agents, some adaptation operators are redundant for
every ARG state: delete and addjoin are redundant with respect to agent a and
refine is redundant with respect to agent b. Before we deﬁne this redundancy with
respect to one agent (partial redundancy), let us ﬁrst consider what it means for an
operator to be redundant (with respect to both agents). An adaptation operator
α is redundant if and only if solely applying !Cbpoq to the DEOL translation of s
is already suﬃcient to obtain an interpretation of the DEOL translation of αpsq.

Deﬁnition 22 (Redundancy) An adaptation operator α is redundant if and
only if @s: pτ psqq!Cbpoq ( τ pαpsqq.

ARG state (s)

"

τ

δ

α

DEOL theory

!Cbpoq

dpαrCa Ě Cb, osq

)

)

DEOL models (M)

ARG state (αpsq)

τ

DEOL theory

)

DEOL models (Mδpαq)

Fig. 9 The translation from ARG states (s) to DEOL theories (τ ), interpreted on DEOL
models (M), and from adaptation operators (α) to dynamic upgrades (δ) for redundant adap-
tation operators. Hence, Mδpαq is already a model of τ psqY!Cbpoq.

The adaptation operators discussed here are not redundant, but partially re-
dundant. This means that they are redundant with respect to one agent. To prove
redundancy, we show that the knowledge and belief of this agent are invariant to
the application of the adaptation operator. In fact, because adaptation operators
only alter the beliefs of agents, it suﬃces to show partial redundancy by showing
that the beliefs of that agent remain unchanged.

Deﬁnition 23 (Partial Redundancy) An adaptation operator α is partially
redundant for agent a if and only if pτ psqq!Cbpoq ( Baφ implies τ pαpsqq ( Baφ for
each ARG state s and each φ in LDEOL.

Proposition 7 (Partial redundancy) The adaptation operators delete and
addjoin are partially redundant with respect to agent a, and refine is partially
redundant with respect to agent b.

However, none of the adaptation operators is redundant with respect to both
agents. Even the simple delete carries valuable information to agent b: namely
that the initial correspondence fails. Without this operator, agent b would not be
aware whether the round of ARG is a success or a failure.

6.3 Incompleteness

Finally, we consider completeness of the adaptation operators: do the operators
capture all the information that can be learned? Intuitively, this is proven by

A Logical Model for the Ontology Alignment Repair Game

23

Ď

Ě

‘

‘

Ď

Da

o

‘

Ě

Ě

Ě

Ca

(cid:32)o

Ě

Ě

Cb

(cid:32)o

Ď

Da

o

Ď

Ě

‘

‘

(cid:32)

Ě

Ğ

Ě

Ca

(cid:32)o

Ğ

Ě

Cb

o

‘

(cid:32)

Fig. 10 The knowledge (solid black) and beliefs (dashed blue) of agent a before (left) and
after (right) the announcement !Cbpoq.

comparing what is learned by the agents in ARG scenarios from application of the
adaptation operators with what is learned by logical agents in DEOL from the
dynamic upgrades. If the former implies the later, the operator is (epistemically)
complete.

To show that the adaptation operators are complete, we show that the diagram
of Figure 3 commutes in the reverse direction compared to correctness. More pre-
cisely, that, from an ARG state s, by moving right (τ ) and then down (δpαq) we
obtain DEOL axioms that are also obtained by moving ﬁrst down (α) and then
right (τ ).

Deﬁnition 24 (Completeness) An adaptation operator α is complete if and
only if @s: τ pαpsqq ( pτ psqqδpαq.

Proposition 8 (Incompleteness) All adaptation operators are incomplete.

6.4 Discussion

Experiments have shown that ARG works quite well in practice: through applica-
tion of the adaptation operators, agents can reach successful communication [11,
13]. Furthermore, the adaptation operators are ARG state preserving (Property 1),
produce safe and entailed alignments [13] and work even with globally inconsistent
networks of ontologies (Figure 6). Why is that despite the lack of formal proper-
ties? In short, this is because agents do not need to be logical to be successful.

For example, the incompleteness of the adaptation operators is based on the
fact that ARG agents do not memorize the failure of the correspondence with the
drawn object. They forget to which class the other agent classiﬁes the drawn object
– yet, this is deduced knowledge in DEOL through the announcement !Cbpoq.
Nevertheless, even without this knowledge, agents can communicate successfully.
That is, they do not need the concrete examples (the object o that caused the
failure of the correspondence) in order to communicate with each other, as long
as they can use more general conclusions (the improved alignment). Hence, they
do not need to remember the cases that led them to these conclusions.

This discussion may also be linked to redundancy: it is based on the fact that
the same announcement !Cbpoq provides extra knowledge to logical agents not
available to ARG agents. Hence, one may think that the announcement could have

24

Line van den Berg et al.

been avoided in the translation of operators in order to prevent incompleteness and
redundancy. However, the main objection is that the current translation is indeed
faithful to the ARG game: agents announce to which class the object belongs, they
use this fact to improve their alignment and then forget it.

Another alternative would be to concentrate on the alignment only instead of
measuring the formal properties with respect to the full knowledge and belief of
the agent. The operators may then be complete. This remains an open question.

7 Conclusion

In order to understand the formal properties of adaptation operators used in the
alignment repair game, we modelled the game into a dynamic epistemic logic,
DEOL, with embedded ontological statements. We assessed the faithfulness of this
translation by showing that it preserves consequences of ontologies and alignments
and that the generated knowledge is the same if the game states are consistent.
With DEOL, we proved that all but the add operator are correct, that delete,
addjoin and refine are redundant for one agent, and that all adaptation operators
are incomplete. These results complement the experimental ones in theoretically
comparing the diﬀerent adaptation operators.

This work bridges a very practical implementation of adaptive agents used
in simulations to a dynamic epistemic model of logical agents. In spite of, or
because of, the simplicity of ARG, this revealed more challenging than expected.
Developing a tighter connection requires addressing fundamental issues that we
discuss hereafter.

There are two ways to interpret our results: either the ARG agents use sub-
logical behavior, or our logical modeling is too strong and not faithful to them,
although the results in Section 5.1.1 show that it is very close. Both interpreta-
tions are correct and compatible, but addressing them dictates diﬀerent courses
of action. One direction is to implement ARG agents that reason more faithfully
to the DEOL logic. Although this was not the goal of the initial experiments,
providing agents with more logical reasoning power can be considered. The oppo-
site direction consists in bringing the logic closer to the agents. In particular, the
proof of incompleteness draws on the inability of agents to remember individual
cases because they focus on general knowledge (they draw general conclusions but
forget the instances that led them to these conclusions). Introducing forgetting
operations may help reaching a closer model [32, 33].

There are, however, other diﬀerences between ARG agents and their logical
modeling in DEOL that would be worth investigating. A ﬁrst one is the diﬀer-
ence between local and global reasoning. So far we have compared the encoding of
ontologies and alignments locally, i.e. one by one. This is a correct way to model
agents because they indeed can only reason locally. However, as shown in Sec-
tion 5.1.1, this is another place where it could be shown that the logical model is
more powerful (can deduce more) than agents. Another diﬀerence comes from the
logical model to be deﬁned in function of a unique signature. In open environments,
in which agents should be able to evolve, it is natural that agents are not aware of
the signatures of other agents and discover them as their knowledge evolves. Yet, if
this is not necessary, they will not be aware of their whole signatures. The current

A Logical Model for the Ontology Alignment Repair Game

25

logical model assumes a ﬁxed set of symbols shared by all agents. It would be a
desirable feature for a model to drop this assumption and to model unawareness
of agents and the way agents can raise their awareness progressively [15, 32, 33, 30,
6].

This work may also be linked to belief revision. Indeed, the announcements
cause agents to change their beliefs so that consistency is preserved. However, they
do not do it in a minimal way. The ARG adaptation operators, besides delete,
have been designed to address this problem [13]: the added correspondences were
entailed by the deleted one. Although ARG has not been studied under the light
of belief revision, this has been the case of dynamic logic [4, 27]. Hence, this model
may be used to ﬁnd out if the adaptation operators are correct belief revision
operations.

Beyond the speciﬁc case of the ARG game, this work provides a methodology
to assess other games within dynamic epistemic logic. Indeed, it suggests how to
translate such games (ontologies and gameplay) to DEOL and it deﬁnes properties
that could be satisﬁed (correctness, completeness and redundancy). Of course, as
discussed before, these are properties of both the game and the translation, hence
one must be cautious about what the translation preserves (faithfulness).

A ﬁnal perspective of this work is that Dynamic Epistemic Logic seems a
promising framework for modelling cultural evolution or, at least, cultural knowl-
edge evolution. Indeed, it oﬀers ways to express agent beliefs and to announce,
i.e. communicate, assertions. It can also constrain consistency and ﬁnally belief
revision methods have been tied to it. This may be the basis to logic-based adap-
tation operators (replacing the DEOL upgrades corresponding to the adaptation
operators used in this work).

Acknowledgements This work has been partially supported by MIAI @ Grenoble Alpes
(ANR-19-P3IA-0003).

26

A Proofs

A.1 Properties of ARG ontologies

Line van den Berg et al.

Lemma 2 For any ARG ontology O of signature xC, Dy, @C P C, there exists a unique ﬁnite
chain C0, . . . Cn; @i P r1, ns, Ci Ď Ci`1 P O, C0 “ C and Cn “ J.

Proof This is a consequence Deﬁnition 2: For any C P C, either C “ J, and then the property
is satisﬁed with the chain reduced to J (n “ 0). It is unique because there exist no J Ď D P O
(Deﬁnition 2(1)). Otherwise, there exists a unique C1 such that C Ď C1 P O (Deﬁnition 2(2)).
This reasoning can be iterated until ﬁnding Cn “ J. This is warranted because O is ﬁnite
(Deﬁnition 2) and the graph of Ď in O contains no cycle (Deﬁnition 2(5)).
[\

Deﬁnition 25 (Standard Model) Let O be an ARG ontology over a signature xC, Dy. Let
ˆI0 be the interpretation deﬁned by
1. ∆ ˆI0 “ D
2. o ˆI0 “ o for every o P D
3. C ˆI0 “ to P D : Cpoq P Ou for every C P C
Given ˆIk (k ě 0), we deﬁne ˆIk`1 as an extension of ˆIk by applying the following rule:

if C Ď D P O and o P D such that o P C

ˆIk and o R D

ˆIk then o P D

ˆIk`1

(7)

Then the standard model ˆI is deﬁned as ˆIn such that ˆIn “ ˆIm for every m ě n.

In the following, we will also say standard interpretation for a class C for the interpretation

of C in the standard model.

Proof (Proposition 1) Let O be an ARG ontology over a signature xC, Dy and let ˆI be the
standard model of O.

The standard model is well deﬁned because both O and D are ﬁnite and therefore (7) can
only be applied a ﬁnite number of times until n P N is reached such that ˆIn “ ˆIm for every
m ě n. This means that the sequence t ˆIkukě0 converges to ˆIn, which is deﬁned as ˆI.

Let us prove that ˆI is a model of O. Let C Ď D P O. Assume that ˆI * C Ď D. Then,
there exists o P D such that o P C ˆI and o R D ˆI . This means that (7) can be applied to extend
ˆI “ ˆIn to ˆIn`1 by adding o to ˆIn`1. But this contradicts the fact that ˆI is deﬁned ˆIn such
that for every m ě n: ˆIn “ ˆIm. So in particular, ˆIn`1 “ ˆIn. Therefore, ˆI |ù C Ď D.

Let C ‘ D P O and assume, towards contradiction, that ˆI * C ‘ D. This means that there

exists o P D such that o P C ˆI and o P D ˆI . By construction of ˆI, there are four possibilities:
1. o P C ˆI0 and o P D ˆI0 . In this case, Cpoq, Dpoq P O. Therefore, O * C ‘D, which contradicts

the fact that C ‘ D P O.

Dk “ D, for 0 ď i ď k ´ 1: Di Ď Di`1 P O and o P D

2. o P C ˆI0 but o R D ˆI0 . Then, by deﬁnition of ˆI, there exist D0, . . . , Dk P C (k ą 0) such that
ˆI0
0 . Then, by (7), for 0 ď i ď k ´ 1:
ˆIi`1
i`1 . Since D0poq P O and Di Ď Di`1 (0 ď i ď k ´ 1) and
o P D
Dk “ D, then O ( Dpoq. But then, since Cpoq P O, it holds that O * C ‘ D, which
contradicts the fact that C ‘ D P O.

ˆIi
i`1 and o P D

ˆIi
i , o R D

3. o P D ˆI0 but o R C ˆI0 . Then, similarly to the argument above, there exists C0, . . . , Ck P C
ˆI0
(k ą 0) such that Ck “ C, for 0 ď i ď k ´ 1: Ci Ď Ci`1 P O and o P C
0 . And therefore,
analogous to the case above, we have Dpoq P O but O ( Cpoq and hence O * C ‘ D,
contradicting C ‘ D P O.

4. o R C ˆI0 and o R D ˆI0 . Then, again, there exists classes C0, . . . , Ck P C and D0, . . . , D1

k P C
(k, k1 ą 0) to infer that O ( Cpoq and O ( Dpoq and hence O * C ‘ D, contradicting
C ‘ D P O.

And therefore it must hold that ˆI ( C ‘ D.

Finally, let Cpoq P O. Then, by deﬁnition of the standard model, o P C ˆI0 . But then,
because for each k P N, ˆIk`1 extends ˆIk, it must be that o P C ˆIk . Thus o P C ˆI and hence
ˆI ( Cpoq.
[\

A Logical Model for the Ontology Alignment Repair Game

27

We ﬁrst establish four properties of ARG ontologies which are used as arguments in various

proofs:

Lemma 3 For any ARG ontology O of signature xC, Dy:
(a) @C P C, O ( C Ď J.
(b) For any two diﬀerent class names D, D1 P CztJu, either O ( D Ď D1 or O ( D1 Ď D or

O ( D1 ‘ D.

i Ď C1

(c) For each C P C, Do P D; O ( Cpoq.
(d) For all classes C, C1 P C, if O ( C Ď C1 and O ( C1 Ď C, then C “ C1.
Proof (a) @C P C, O ( C Ď J. For all model I of O, JI “ ∆ and CI Ď ∆, hence CI Ď JI .
(b) For any two diﬀerent class names D, D1 P CztJu, either O ( D Ď D1 or O ( D1 Ď D or
O ( D1 ‘ D. We know that (Deﬁnition 2(5)) DC0, . . . Cm; @i P r1, ms, Ci Ď Ci´1 P O,
n “ D1.
0 “ J and C1
n; @j P r1, ns, C1
0, . . . C1
C0 “ J and Cm “ D and DC1
There is a rank k ď minpm, nq, such that @i P r0, ks, Ci “ C1
i (at the minimum this is
k “ D1 and
true for k “ 0). If k “ m, then Ck “ D and O ( D Ď D1; if k “ n, then C1
O ( D1 Ď D; otherwise Ck`1 ‰ C1
k P O.
But it can easily be checked that for each model I of O, DI Ď CI
k`1, and
k`1 “ H. Hence, DI X D1I “ H, so O ( D ‘ D1.
CI

k`1. This means that (Deﬁnition 2(3)) Ck ‘ C1
k`1, D1I Ď C1I

i´1 P O, C1

k`1 X C1I

(c) For each C P C, Do P D; O ( Cpoq. Either (Deﬁnition 2(3)) Do P D; Cpoq P O, thus
O ( Cpoq, or DC1 P C; C Ď C1 P O. In the latter case, since C is ﬁnite and (4) the
graph made by Ď-axioms in O is non circular, DC0, . . . Cm; @i P r1, ms, Ci Ď Ci´1 P O,
C0 “ C and (Deﬁnition 2(3)) Cmpoq P O. This entails that, for each model I of O,
oI P CI

m Ď ¨ ¨ ¨ Ď CI , hence O ( Cpoq.

(d) For all classes C, C1 P C, if O ( C Ď C1 and O ( C1 Ď C, then C “ C1. This can be
rephrased as: @C, C1 P C, if C ‰ C1, then it is not possible to have O ( C Ď C1 and
O ( C1 Ď C. We know that (Deﬁnition 2(5)) DC0, . . . Cm; @i P r1, ms, Ci Ď Ci´1 P O,
0 “ J and C1
n “ D1.
C0 “ J and Cm “ D and DC1
n; @j P r1, ns, C1
There is a rank k ď minpm, nq, such that @i P r0, ks, Ci “ C1
i (at the minimum this is true
for k “ 0). Since C ‰ C1, then k ‰ m or k ‰ n. Hence (Deﬁnition 2(3)) D!xD, D1y P C ˆ C;
D Ď Ck P O, D1 Ď Ck P O, and D ‘ D1 P O. Consider that k ‰ m and k ‰ n, then
for all models I of O, CI Ď DI and C1I Ď D1I , hence CI X C1I “ H, but (Lemma 3(c))
CI ‰ H, thus O * C Ď C1. Now, consider that k “ n and k ‰ m, then (Deﬁnition 2(3))
D!xD, D1y P C ˆ C; D Ď Ck P O, D1 Ď Ck P O, and D ‘ D1 P O. Moreover, (Lemma 3(c))
Do, o1 P D; O ( Cpoq, O ( D1po1q. This means that for all models I of O, oI P CI Ď DI ,
k “ C1I and CI X D1I “ H, hence o1I R CI , thus O * C1 Ď C.
o1I P D1I Ď CI
[\
Clause (d) shows that Ď is a partial order on C for O (it inherits transitivity and reﬂexivity
from sets). The lemma is stated for consistent ARG ontologies but by their constraints, any
ARG ontology is consistent.

i´1 P O, C1

0, . . . C1

i Ď C1

Proof (Lemma 1)
(a) Let SuppCq “ tD P CztCu; O ( C Ď Du, the set of C subsumer names. This set is non
empty because (Lemma 3(a)) it contains J. That SuppCq has no most speciﬁc element
would mean that it contains at least two diﬀerent class names D and D1 such that neither
O ( D Ď D1, nor O ( D1 Ď D. Hence, (Lemma 3(b)) O ( D‘D1. However, (Lemma 3(c))
there exists o P D such that O ( Cpoq. That would mean that for all models I of O,
oI P CI Ď DI , oI P CI Ď D1I and DI X D1I “ H. There cannot be such models.

(b) Let Clpoq “ tD P C; O ( Dpoqu the set of classes to which o belongs. This set is non empty
as it contains J, indeed, for all models I of O, oI P JI . That Clpoq has no most speciﬁc
element would mean that it contains at least two diﬀerent class names D and D1 such that
neither O ( D Ď D1, nor O ( D1 Ď D. Hence, (Lemma 3(b)) O ( D ‘ D1. That would
mean that for all models I of O, oI P DI X D1I and DI X D1I “ H. There cannot be such
models.

(c) Consider SuppC, oq “ pSuppCqYtCuqXClpoq. This set contains at least J. Since SuppC, oq
is a set of classes to which o belong, the same argument as for the previous property can
be used. If it contains C (i.e. O ( Cpoq), then C “ msccpo, Cq.

(d) Let SubpCq “ tC1 P C|O |ù C1 Ď Cu, mgcxpC, oq is deﬁned as the maximal elements
(Ď-wise) of the elements of SubpCq such that O * C1poq. This is always well-deﬁned as
these constraints are well-deﬁned. If SubpCq is empty (C has no subclasses) or none of its
elements satisfy the constraint, then mgcxpC, oq “ H. Otherwise, mgcxpC, oq is not empty
because among those elements of SubpCq satisfying the constraint, there are maximal ones
because Ď is a (ﬁnite) partial order on C for O.
[\

28

Line van den Berg et al.

A.2 Proof of adaptation operators

Proof (Property 1) Consider without loss of generality that c “ xCa, Cb, Ěy P Aab. Only
alignment Aab of the initial ARG state is modiﬁed, hence it is necessary to verify that the
modiﬁcations are well-deﬁned and that their application to Aab returns an ARG alignment.
The only deletion concerns the faulty correspondence xCa, Cb, Ěy. Since it belongs to Aab, its
deletion is always possible. The only way it could prevent the modiﬁed alignment to be an
ARG alignment, would be if Ca “ Ja and Cb “ Jb (because Aab is an ARG alignment, there
can be only one alignment arriving at class Jb). But this would mean that Oa * Japoq which
is not possible because in any model x¨I , ∆y of Oa, oI P ∆ and JI
a “ ∆. Hence, the deletion
is well-deﬁned and preserves the ARG state. Hence, delete is already well-deﬁned. Concern-
ing the addition, this concerns xmscapCaq, Cb, Ěy (add), xmsccapo, Caq, Cb Ěy (addjoin), and
txCa, C1
b, Ěyu (refine). First, from Lemma 1, mscapCaq and msccapo, Caq always exists and
are unique which make the operators well-deﬁned. Moreover, because Aab is an ARG align-
ment, it had only one correspondence xCa, Cb, Ěy, that has been deleted, then by adding
the new correspondence, the new alignment is also an ARG alignment. Next, mgcxbpCb, oq is
well-deﬁned and a correspondence xCa, C1
b, Ěy is added by refine only if there is no other con-
ﬂicting correspondence xC1
b, Ěy in Aab. Hence, the result of refine is an ARG alignment.
Finally, since refadd adds correspondences from diﬀerent classes of Ob (Cb for addjoin and
the elements of mgcxbpCb, oq for refine and Cb R mgcxbpCb, oq otherwise the failure would not
have occured), there cannot be two correspondences from the same class, hence this generates
an ARG alignment.
[\

a, C1

A.3 Proofs of faithfulness

Proof (Proposition 2)
Proof of Equation 4

We consider two cases: (1) τ psq has a model and (2) τ psq has no model. Whenever (2),
Equation 4 trivially holds: every model of τ psq (which are zero) makes Kaφ true and therefore
Oa ( φ ñ τ psq ( Kaφ.

Otherwise, when τ psq has a model, for any ψ P Oa, by Deﬁnition 18 of the translation,
Kaψ is an axiom of τ psq. This means that for any model xM, wy of τ psq and any world v
accessible for a from w, M, v ( ψ. Now assume that τ psq * Kaφ for some φ. This means that
there exists a model xM, wy of τ psq and a world v reachable for a from w in which M, v * φ.
In such a case, the interpretation Iv at world v of M would be a model of Oa (because, by
the translation, it satisﬁes all axioms of Oa), thus Oa * φ. Hence, the contraposition holds: if
Oa ( φ then τ psq ( Kaφ.
Proof of Equation 5

Again, we consider the two cases: (1) τ psq has a model and (2) τ psq has no model, and
whenever (2), Equation 5 trivially holds: every model of τ psq (which are zero) makes Baγ true
and therefore Aab ( γ ñ τ psq ( Baγ.

Otherwise, when τ psq has a model, for any ψ P Oa, Kaψ P τ psq (Deﬁnition 18), so
τ psq ( Baψ. In addition, for any γ1 P Aab, Baγ1 ^ Bbγ1 is an axiom of τ psq (Deﬁnition 18).
This means that for any model xM, wy of τ psq and any world v most plausible for a from
w, M, v ( ψ and M, v ( γ1. Now assume that τ psq * Baγ for some correspondence γ. This
means that there exists a model xM, wy of τ psq and a world v that is considered most plausible
for a from w in which M, v * γ. In such a case, the interpretation Iv of M at v would be an
extension of a model of Oa to Ca Y Cb (because by the translation it satisﬁes all axioms of Oa
and all correspondences of Aab), thus Aab *a γ. Hence, the contraposition holds: if Aab (a γ
then τ psq ( Baγ.
[\

Deﬁnition 26 (Standard DEOL Models) Let s be an ARG state for a set of agents A. The
standard DEOL models xMs, wsy for s are deﬁned by letting Ms “ xW s, pěs
aqaPA, ∆s, I sy
and:
– W s “ twsu Y twauaPA;
– ěs
– ∆s “ D;

a“ txw, wyuwPW Y txws, wayu;

And the interpretation I s assigns:

A Logical Model for the Ontology Alignment Repair Game

29

1. to each world v and each object name o P D the object o: i.e. I s
2. to ws and class name C P Ca the standard interpretation (Deﬁnition 25) ˆIa of Oa: i.e.

v poq “ o,

CIs

ws “ C ˆIa ,

3. and to wa an interpretation I 1

a such that Ia Ď I 1

a for Ia (a

Ť
bPAztau Aab, i.e. CIs

wa “ CI1
a .

The DEOL model in Deﬁnition 26 is constructed in such a way that for each agent a, there
is a most plausible world wa reached from ws such that the interpretation at wa is exactly
the extension I 1
a of the interpretation Ia that locally satisﬁes all the correspondences of all the
alignments involving a. I 1
a is
not unique. There can be multiple interpretations I 1
a Ě Ia
bPAztau Aab, and hence also multiple DEOL models xMs, wsy.
for some Ia such that Ia (a
This is not important, because we just need one. And the existence of one is guaranteed by
the fact that s is locally consistent.

a is guaranteed to exists because s is locally consistent. However, I 1

a that satisfy the requirement that I 1

Ť

Lemma 4 For all ARG states s, xMs, wsy as deﬁned in Deﬁnition 26 is a model of τ psq.

Proof We need to show that @a P A, @b P Aztau, @φa P Oa, @γ P Aab: Ms, ws ( Kapφaq ^
Bapγq. Hence, that @φa P Oa: Ms, ws ( φa and Ms, wa ( φa and (2) @γ P Aab: Ms, wa ( γ.
[Ms, ws ( φa] At ws, the interpretation is such that it assigns to each class C the standard
interpretation ˆIa for agent a such that C P Ca. And because by construction the standard
interpretation ˆIa for Oa satisﬁes each φa in Oa: Ms, ws ( φa.

[Ms, wa ( φa ^ γ] At wa, the interpretation is I 1

such that Ia (a Aab for each b P Aztau. This means that (1) I 1
Ia does, and (2) I 1
Ť
and @γ P

aPA Ca
a satisﬁes all φa in Oa, because
a satisﬁes all the alignments involving a. Hence, @φa P Oa: Ms, wa ( φa,

a, an extension of Ia of Oa to

bPAztau Aab: Ms, wa ( γ.

Therefore each agent knows her ontology and beliefs her alignments and so xMs, wsy is a
[\

model of τ psq.

Ť

Proof (Proposition 3)
(if ) Assume that s is an ARG state for a set of agents A with locally consistent alignments.
That means that, for each agent a there is a local model Ia for Oa of the alignments in-
volving a, i.e. of
a of Ia that locally satisﬁes all
bPAztbu Aab and all φa P Oa. We need to show that τ psq has a model. Let xMs, wsy be
γ P
as deﬁned in Deﬁnition 26, then, by Lemma 4, xMs, wsy is a model of τ psq.

bPAztbu Aab. Thus there is an extension I 1

Ť

Ť

Ť

(only if ) Assume that s is an ARG state for a set of agents A such that s does not
have locally consistent alignments. Thus, there is an agent a P A for which there exists no
local model Ia for Oa of the alignments involving a. In other words, for each model Ia of Oa,
there exists no extension I 1
a that satisﬁes Aab for each b P Aztau. Now suppose, towards a
contradiction, that there is a model xM, wy of τ psq. Then, by the translation, it must be that
@γ P
bPAztau Aab: M, w ( Baγ. Thus, each correspondence in an alignment involving a must
be true at any of the most plausible worlds v for a from w. In addition, @φ P Oa, again by the
translation, it holds that M, w ( Kaφ. I.e. φ should be true in all accessible worlds for a from
w, and, in particular, at v. This means that the interpretation Iv at world v must be a model
of Oa and therefore, since s is not locally consistent, no extension of Iv exists that locally
satisﬁes all the alignments involving a. But then it cannot be the case that all correspondences
bPAztau Aab are true at v. Hence, we arrive at a contradiction. Thus there is no such
@γ P
model.
[\

Ť

For the proof of Proposition 4, we prove a property of standard interpretations (Deﬁni-
tion 25): for two diﬀerent classes C, D, if the canonical interpretation of D is an extension of
that of C, the reverse cannot hold. This is true because ARG ontologies are constructed as
dichotomic trees.

Lemma 5 For each locally consistent ARG state s and for each canonical model of τ psq,
for every ARG ontology Oa over signature xCa, Dy and for every two classes C, D P Ca: if
C ˆI Ď D ˆI and C ‰ D then D ˆI Ę C ˆI .

Proof By Deﬁnition 26, any class C, D P C are diﬀerent and their interpretation is not empty.
Hence, there is at least an object o P D such that o P C ˆI and, given that C ˆI Ď D ˆI , o P D ˆI . By

30

Line van den Berg et al.

deﬁnition of ARG ontologies (Deﬁnition 2(4)), for any o P D, there is a unique Co P C such
that Copoq P Oa. Hence, o P C ˆI means that either (a) C “ Co or (b) DC1, C2 P C; C1 Ď C P O,
C2 Ď C P O, and o P C1 ˆI and o R C1 ˆI (because C1 ‘ C2 P Oa, Deﬁnition 2(3)). By induction,
this means that there is a chain of classes C1, C2, . . . , Cn P Ca with Ci Ď Ci`1 P Oa, C1 “ C
and Cn “ Co. The same holds true for D. Moreover (Lemma 2), there is a unique chain
C1, C2, . . . , Cn P Ca with Ci Ď Ci`1 P Oa, C1 “ Co and Cn “ J. Since this also holds true
for C and D, this means that they both belong to this chain (Di, j P r1, ns such that Ci “ C
and Cj “ D and i ‰ j because C ‰ D). Now, if i ą j, then C Ď C1, C Ď C2 and C1 ‘ C2
(Deﬁnition 2(3)). Assume, w.l.o.g., that Ci´1 “ C1 this means that C2 ˆI Ď C ˆI and C2 ˆI Ę C1 ˆI ,
but since i ą j, this means that C2 ˆI Ę D ˆI , thus C ˆI Ę D ˆI which contradicts the hypothesis.
Hence, j ą i then D Ď D1, D Ď D2 and D1 ‘ D2 (Deﬁnition 2(3)). Assume, again w.l.o.g.,
that Di´1 “ D1 this means that D2 ˆI Ď D ˆI and D2 ˆI Ę D1 ˆI , but since j ą i, this means that
D2 ˆI Ę C ˆI , thus D ˆI Ę C ˆI .
[\

Proof (Proof of Proposition 4) We assume that τ psq ( Kaφ for an ARG state s that is locally
consistent and have to show that Oa ( φ.

[φ “ Cpoq] Consider that τ psq ( KapCpoqq. There exists a unique D such that Dpoq P Oa
(Deﬁnition 2(4)) and hence Oa ( Dpoq. If C “ D, then the statement is proven. Otherwise one
of the following holds: (i) Oa ( C Ď D, (ii) Oa ( D Ď C or (iii) Oa ( C ‘ D (Lemma 3(b)).
Case (i) is impossible because, since C and D are diﬀerent, D cannot be the (unique) most
speciﬁc class of object o. In case (iii), by the forward direction, τ psq ( KapC ‘ Dq and
τ psq ( KapDpoqq. Hence, in every pointed model xM, wy of τ psq and at each world v accessible
for a from w, oIv P CIv , oIv P DIv , and CIv XDIv “ H. There can exist no such interpretation.
Thus case (ii) holds, which means that Oa ( D Ď C, which together with Oa ( Dpoq entails
Oa ( Cpoq.

[φ “ CRD] Next, consider that φ states the relation between two classes C and D, where
τ psq ( Kapφq. If C “ D, it is clear that τ psq ( KapC Ď Dq, τ psq ( KapD Ď Cq and
τ psq * KapC ‘ Dq (because in a model xM, wy of τ psq and in any world v accessible for a from
w, the interpretation of the class will be the same and non-empty) and for the same reasons,
it is clear that Oa ( C Ď D, Oa ( D Ď C and Oa * C ‘ D.

Otherwise (C ‰ D), we know that (Lemma 3(b)) Oa ( ψ for either (i) ψ “ C Ď D, (ii)
ψ “ D Ď C or (iii) ψ “ C ‘D, and (from the forward direction) τ psq ( Kapψq. In addition, the
interpretation of C and D cannot be empty (Lemma 3(c)) so there exists o, o1 P D such that
Oa ( Cpoq and Oa ( Dpo1q and thus (by the forward direction) τ psq ( KapCpoqq ^ KapDpo1qq.
Hence, in each model xM, wy of τ psq and in each world v accessible for a from w, M, v ( φ,
M, v ( ψ, and M, v ( Cpoq ^ Dpo1q.

– If φ “ C ‘ D, then the interpretation Iv cannot be such that ψ “ C Ď D or ψ “ D Ď C
because otherwise CIv X DIv would contain either oIv or o1Iv . Hence, it must be that
ψ “ C ‘ D and thus Oa ( C ‘ D.

– If φ “ C Ď D, then just as in the previous case no interpretation can accommodate
ψ “ C ‘ D. In order to exclude ψ “ D Ď C, we show that there exists a model xM, wy of
τ psq such that M, w * KapD Ď Cq. Because then, by the forward direction (Proposition 2),
also Oa * D Ď C and thus, by Lemma 3(b), Oa ( C Ď D. Since s is locally consistent, we
can a DEOL model xMs, wsy of s (Deﬁnition 26) such that Ms, ws ( τ psq and therefore
Ms, ws ( KapC Ď Dq, i.e. CIw Ď DIw for each w P tws, wau and in particular this must
hold at ws. Because CIws “ CIa and DIws “ DIa it follows that CIa Ď DIa . Hence,
by Lemma 5, DIa Ę CIa and thus DIws Ę CIws . In other words, Ms, ws * D Ď C,
Ms, ws * KapD Ď Cq and thus τ psq * KapD Ď Cq. Hence Oa ( C Ď D.

– Finally, if φ “ D Ď C, exchanging the symbols C and D in the previous case completes
[\

the proof.

A.4 Proofs of correctness, redundancy and incompleteness

Proof (Proposition 5) We do the proof for agent a and adaptation operator addjoin. The
proof for delete now follows because it is entailed by addjoin, and the proof for refine is
symmetric.

A Logical Model for the Ontology Alignment Repair Game

31

aĚCbq ( BipCa Ğ Cbq ^ BipCo

a for msccapo, Caq): pτ psqq!Cbpoq;ÒpCaĞCb^Co

Because addjoin only adds beliefs, it suﬃces to show that these beliefs are entailed (we
note Co
a Ě Cbq.
This holds because initially the correspondence is believed, i.e. τ psq ( BipCa Ě Cbq, and the
upgrade !Cbpoq; Ò pCa Ğ Cb ^ Co
a Ě Cbq deletes all the worlds from τ psq in which Cbpoq is
false and then rearranges the remaining worlds such that the ‘Ca Ğ Cb ^ Co
a Ě Cb’-worlds
become more plausible than the ‘(cid:32)pCa Ğ Cb ^ Co
a Ě Cbq’-worlds. Because there remain
‘Ca Ğ Cb ^ Co
a Ě Cb’-worlds accessible for both agents, the belief is enforced. For agent b,
this is true because the announcement !Cbpoq does not alter her epistemic-doxastic state (she
already knew that Cbpoq as it is in her ontology), and for agent a, because the announcement
!Cbpoq deletes the worlds in which Ca Ě Cb ((cid:32)Capoq holds because the correspondence and
announcement caused a failure) or Ca ” Cb so that both Ca Ğ Cb or Co
a Ě Cb are unchanged.
Therefore the beliefs BipCa Ğ Cbq and BipCo
a Ě Cbq are enforced for agents i P ta, bu. Hence
addjoin is correct.
[\

Proof (Proposition 6) We need to prove the existence of an ARG state s where pτ psqqδpaddq *
τ paddpsqq with upgrade δpaddq “!Cbpoq; Ò pCa Ğ Cb ^mscapCaq Ě Cbq, object o s.t. Ob ( Cbpoq
and xCa, Cb, Ěy P Aab the failing correspondence. Pick s to be any such ARG state where the
most speciﬁc superclass C1 “ mscapCaq of Ca is incompatible with o, i.e. Oa * C1poq. Then
τ psq ( Kap(cid:32)C1poqq and pτ psqqδpaddq ( KapCbpoqq ^ KapC1 Ğ Cbq. This is because δpaddq
deletes all ‘(cid:32)Cbpoq’-worlds from τ psq and therefore also all the worlds accessible by agent a
where C Ě Cb for C such that τ psq ( KapCpoqq. In particular, this holds for C1 “ mscapCaq.
But, after applying the adaptation operator add, xC1, Cb, Ěy becomes part of the alignment,
so that τ paddpsqq ( BapC1 Ě Cbq. Hence pτ psqqδpaddq * τ paddpsqq.

Moreover, whenever pτ psqqδpaddq ( τ paddpsqq it must be that Oa ( C1poq so that, per
[\

deﬁnition, C1 “ mscapCaq “ msccapo, Caq, i.e. add is equivalent to addjoin.

Proof (Proposition 7) We do the proof for agent a and the adaptation operator addjoin. The
proof for delete now follows because it is entailed by addjoin, and the proof for refine is
symmetric.

Thus we need to show that if pτ psqq!Cbpoq ( Baφ holds, then it is also the case that
τ paddjoinrxCa, Cb, Ěy, ospsqq ( Baφ holds. Consider a sentence φ that is not believed by
agent a in the state transformed by the adaptation operator, τ paddjoinrxCa, Cb, Ěy, ospsqq,
but is in the original state τ psq. By construction of the dynamics of the operator addjoin,
this can only be (1) a belief that is inconsistent with Cbpoq (because the announcement !Cbpoq
deletes these worlds), or (2) Ca Ę Cb (because it is enforced by the conservative upgrade
part of the dynamics). But these are also not believed by agent a in pτ psqq!Cbpoq: (1) because
!Cbpoq has deleted all these beliefs, and (2) because τ psq ( Kap(cid:32)pCapoqqq and this knowledge
is invariant under the announcement !Cbpoq, causing the belief in Ca Ę Cb to be dropped.
Hence, by contraposition, addjoin is partially redundant with respect to agent a. In Figure 10
the knowledge and belief of agent a is illustrated before and after the announcement !Cbpoq
for an intuition.
[\

Proof (Proposition 8) Again, consider the knowledge and belief of agent a before and af-
ter the announcement !Cbpoq, see also Figure 10. After the announcement !Cbpoq, agent a
receives concrete information that object o belongs to the class Cb, i.e. she comes to know
this information: pτ psqq!Cbpoq ( KapCbpoqq. And, by deﬁnition, this knowledge remains after
application of any conservative upgrade, i.e. pτ psqqδpαq ( KapCbpoqq. Yet, this knowledge is
never acquired through application of the adaptation operators because they only concern the
alignment, i.e. beliefs of class relations, and not knowledge of instance classiﬁcation. Hence
τ pαpsqq * KapCbpoqq and τ pαpsqq * pτ psqqδ.
[\

32

References

Line van den Berg et al.

1. Aberer, K., Cudr´e-Mauroux, P., Hauswirth, M.: Start making sense: The chatty web
approach for global semantic agreements. J. Web Semant. 1(1), 89–114 (2003). DOI
10.1016/j.websem.2003.09.001

2. Atencia, M., Schorlemmer, M.: An interaction-based approach to semantic alignment.

Journal of Web Semantics 12, 131–147 (2012). DOI 10.1016/j.websem.2011.12.001

3. Baader, F., Calvanese, D., McGuinness, D.L., Nardi, D., Patel-Schneider, P.F. (eds.):
The Description Logic Handbook: Theory, Implementation, and Applications. Cambridge
University Press (2003)

4. Baltag, A., Smets, S.: Dynamic belief revision over multi-agent plausibility models. In:

Proceedings of LOFT, vol. 6, pp. 11–24. University of Liverpool (2006)

5. Van den Berg, L., Atencia, M., Euzenat, J.: Agent ontology alignment repair through
dynamic epistemic logic.
In: Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on Au-
tonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems, pp. 1422–1430. International Foundation for
Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems (2020)

6. Van den Berg, L., Atencia, M., Euzenat, J.: Unawareness in multi-agent systems with
partial valuations. In: Proceedings of the 10th AAMAS workshop on Logical Aspects of
Multi-Agent Systems (LAMAS) (2020)

7. Blackburn, P., Van Benthem, J., Wolter, F. (eds.): Handbook of Modal Logic, Stud-
ies in logic and practical reasoning, vol. 3. North-Holland (2007). URL https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/bookseries/studies-in-logic-and-practical-reasoning/
vol/3/suppl/C

8. Chocron, P., Schorlemmer, M.: Attuning ontology alignments to semantically heteroge-
In: ECAI 2016 - 22nd European Conference on Artiﬁ-
neous multi-agent interactions.
cial Intelligence, 29 August-2 September 2016, The Hague, The Netherlands - Including
Prestigious Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (PAIS 2016), pp. 871–879 (2016). DOI
10.3233/978-1-61499-672-9-871

9. Chocron, P., Schorlemmer, M.: Vocabulary alignment in openly speciﬁed interactions. In:
Proceedings of the 16th Conference on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems,
AAMAS 2017, S˜ao Paulo, Brazil, May 8-12, 2017, pp. 1064–1072 (2017). URL http:
//dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=3091275

10. Chocron, P., Schorlemmer, M.: Vocabulary alignment in openly speciﬁed interactions.

Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research 68, 69–107 (2020)

11. Euzenat, J.: First experiments in cultural alignment repair (extended version). In: The
Semantic Web: ESWC 2014 Satellite Events - ESWC 2014 Satellite Events, Anissaras,
Crete, Greece, May 25-29, 2014, Revised Selected Papers, pp. 115–130 (2014). DOI
10.1007/978-3-319-11955-7z 10

12. Euzenat, J.: Revision in networks of ontologies. Artiﬁcial intelligence 228, 195–216 (2015)
13. Euzenat, J.: Interaction-based ontology alignment repair with expansion and relaxation.
In: Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelli-
gence, IJCAI 2017, Melbourne, Australia, August 19-25, 2017, pp. 185–191 (2017). DOI
10.24963/ijcai.2017/27

14. Euzenat, J., Shvaiko, P.: Ontology Matching, Second Edition. Springer (2013)
15. Halpern, J.Y.: Alternative semantics for unawareness. Games and Economic Behavior

37(2), 321–339 (2001)

16. Jim´enez-Ruiz, E., Meilicke, C., Cuenca Grau, B., Horrocks, I.: Evaluating mapping repair
systems with large biomedical ontologies. In: Proceedings of the 26th International Work-
shop on Description Logics, Ulm, Germany, July 23 - 26, 2013, pp. 246–257 (2013). URL
http://ceur-ws.org/Vol-1014/paper_63.pdf

17. Jim´enez-Ruiz, E., Payne, T., Solimando, A., Tamma, V.: Limiting logical violations in
In: Principles of Knowledge Representation
ontology alignnment through negotiation.
and Reasoning: Proceedings of the Fifteenth International Conference, KR 2016, Cape
Town, South Africa, April 25-29, 2016., pp. 217–226 (2016). URL http://www.aaai.org/
ocs/index.php/KR/KR16/paper/view/12893

18. Laera, L., Blacoe, I., Tamma, V., Payne, T., Euzenat, J., Bench-Capon, T.: Argumentation
In: Proceedings of the 6th international joint

over ontology correspondences in mas.
conference on Autonomous agents and multiagent systems, pp. 1–8 (2007)

19. Meilicke, C.: Alignment incoherence in ontology matching. Ph.D. thesis, University of

Mannheim (2011). URL https://ub-madoc.bib.uni-mannheim.de/29351

A Logical Model for the Ontology Alignment Repair Game

33

20. Payne, T., Tamma, V.: Negotiating over ontological correspondences with asymmetric and
incomplete knowledge.
In: International conference on Autonomous Agents and Multi-
Agent Systems, AAMAS ’14, Paris, France, May 5-9, 2014, pp. 517–524 (2014). URL
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2615816

21. Plaza, J.: Logic of public communications.

In: Z.W. Ras (ed.) Proceedings of the 4th
International Symposium on Methodologies for Intelligent Systems, pp. 201–216. North-
Holland (1989)

22. Santos, E., Faria, D., Pesquita, C., Couto, F.: Ontology alignment repair through mod-
ularization and conﬁdence-based heuristics. Tech. rep. (2013). URL http://arxiv.org/
abs/1307.5322

23. Shvaiko, P., Euzenat, J.: Ontology matching: State of the art and future challenges. IEEE

Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. 25(1), 158–176 (2013). DOI 10.1109/TKDE.2011.253

24. Steels, L. (ed.): Experiments in cultural language evolution, vol. 3. John Benjamins Pub-

lishing (2012)

25. Tamma, V., Craneﬁeld, S., Finin, T., Willmott, S. (eds.): Ontologies for agents. Birkh¨auser

(2005)

26. Trojahn dos Santos, C., Euzenat, J., Tamma, V., Payne, T.: Argumentation for reconciling
agent ontologies. In: A. El¸ci, M. Kon´e, M. Orgun (eds.) Semantic Agent Systems, chap. 5,
pp. 89–111. Springer, New-York (NY US) (2011)

27. Van Benthem, J.: Dynamic logic for belief revision. Journal of Applied Non-Classical

Logics 17(2), 129–155 (2007). DOI 10.3166/jancl.17.129-155

28. Van Benthem, J.: Logical dynamics of information and interaction. Cambridge University

Press (2011)

29. Van Benthem, J., Van Eijck, J., Kooi, B.: Logics of communication and change.

Inf.

Comput. 204(11), 1620–1662 (2006). DOI 10.1016/j.ic.2006.04.006

30. Van Benthem, J., Vel´azquez-Quesada, F.: The dynamics of awareness. Synthese 177(1),

5–27 (2010)

31. van Diggelen, J., Beun, R.J., Dignum, F., van Eijk, R., Meyer, J.J.: Ontology negotiation
in heterogeneous multi-agent systems: The ANEMONE system. Applied ontology 2(3–4),
267–303 (2007)

32. Van Ditmarsch, H., French, T.: Awareness and forgetting of facts and agents. In: 2009
IEEE/WIC/ACM International Joint Conference on Web Intelligence and Intelligent
Agent Technology, vol. 3, pp. 478–483. IEEE (2009)

33. Van Ditmarsch, H., Herzig, A., Lang, J., Marquis, P.: Introspective forgetting. Synthese

169(2), 405–423 (2009)

34. Van Ditmarsch, H., Van der Hoek, W., Kooi, B.: Dynamic epistemic logic, vol. 337.

Springer Science & Business Media (2007)

