Practical Fully-Decentralized Secure Aggregation for
Personal Data Management Systems
Julien Mirval, Luc Bouganim, Iulian Sandu Popa

To cite this version:

Julien Mirval, Luc Bouganim, Iulian Sandu Popa. Practical Fully-Decentralized Secure Aggregation
for Personal Data Management Systems. BDA 2021 - 37ème Conférence sur la Gestion de Données -
Principes, Technologies et Applications, Oct 2021, Paris, France. ￿hal-03538834￿

HAL Id: hal-03538834

https://hal.science/hal-03538834

Submitted on 21 Jan 2022

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

Practical Fully-Decentralized Secure Aggregation for Personal
Data Management Systems
Luc Bouganim
luc.bouganim@inria.fr
Inria-Saclay
UVSQ, Université Paris-Saclay
France

Iulian Sandu-Popa
iulian.sandu-popa@uvsq.fr
UVSQ, Université Paris-Saclay
Inria-Saclay
France

Julien Mirval
julien.mirval@cozycloud.cc
Cozy Cloud
Inria-Saclay
UVSQ, Université Paris-Saclay
France

Aggregation primitives (e.g., sum or average) are obviously es-
sential to compute basic statistics on user data but are also a fun-
damental building block for machine learning algorithms. Thus,
to enable such new usages, we need scalable, privacy-preserving
protocols implementing data aggregation primitives with selective
(i.e., consenting) participants. Ideally, the proposed protocol should
provide an accurate result that fully takes advantage of high-quality
data available in PDMSs. Efficiency (i.e., protocol latency and total
load of the system) is of prime importance and the protocol should
adapt to several contexts: the PDMSs could be limited by their com-
munication speed or by their computation power. Finally, given the
scale of such decentralized aggregation, such protocols must also
be robust to node failures. To summarize, our goal is to propose an
aggregation protocol for basic aggregate functions that fulfills the
following properties:

• fully decentralized and highly scalable, with the number of

participants.

• privacy-preserving, i.e., it protects the confidentiality of user

data.

• accurate, i.e., it does not require a trade-off between accuracy

and privacy.

• adaptable, i.e, it can adapt to a large spectrum of computation
selectivity values (reflecting the subset of contributor nodes)
and system configurations (network and cryptographic la-
tency).

• reliable, i.e., it handles node failures or voluntary disconnec-

tions.

REFERENCES
[1] Nicolas Anciaux, Philippe Bonnet, Luc Bouganim, Benjamin Nguyen, Philippe
Pucheral, Iulian Sandu Popa, and Guillaume Scerri. 2019. Personal data manage-
ment systems: The security and functionality standpoint. Information Systems 80
(2019), 13–35.

[2] EU Commission. 25 October 2020. Proposal for a Regulation on European data

governance (Data Governance Act), COM/2020/767. [eur-lex].

Personal Data Management Systems (PDMS) are flourishing, boosted
by legal and technical means like smart disclosure, data portabil-
ity and data altruism. A PDMS allows its owner to easily collect,
store and manage data, directly generated by her devices, or re-
sulting from her interactions with companies or administrations.
PDMSs unlock innovative usages by crossing multiple data sources
from one or many users, thus requiring aggregation primitives.
Indeed, aggregation primitives are essential to compute statistics
on user data, but are also a fundamental building block for machine
learning algorithms. This paper proposes a protocol allowing for
secure aggregation in a massively distributed PDMS environment,
which adapts to selective participation and PDMSs characteristics,
and is reliable with respect to failures, with no compromise on
accuracy. Preliminary experiments show the effectiveness of our
protocol which can adapt to several contexts with varying PDMSs
characteristics in terms of communication speed or CPU resources
and can adjust the aggregation strategy to the estimated selective
participation.

The new privacy-protection regulations (e.g., GDPR) and smart
disclosure initiatives in the last decade have boosted the develop-
ment and adoption of Personal Data Management Systems (PDMSs)
[1]. A PDMS (e.g., Cozy Cloud, Nextcloud, Solid) is a data platform
allowing users to easily collect, store and manage into a single place
data directly generated by user devices (e.g., quantified-self data,
smart home data, photos) and data resulting from user interactions
(e.g., social interaction data, health, bank, telecom). Users can then
leverage the power of their PDMS to benefit from their personal
data for their own good and in the interest of the community [2].
Consequently, the PDMS paradigm leads to an important shift
in the personal data ecosystem since data becomes massively dis-
tributed, at the user-side. It also holds the promise of unlocking
innovative usages. An individual can now cross her data from dif-
ferent data silos, e.g., health records and physical activity data.
Moreover, individuals can cross data within large communities of
users, e.g., to compute statistics for epidemiological studies or to
train a machine learning model (ML) for recommender systems
or automatic classification of user data. However, these exciting
perspectives should not eclipse the security issues –user data must
be kept private– and the right for any PDMS user to consent, or
not, in participating in each computation.

© 2021, Copyright is with the authors. Published in the Proceedings of the BDA
2021 Conference (October 25-28, 2021, En ligne, France). Distribution of this paper is
permitted under the terms of the Creative Commons license CC-by-nc-nd 4.0.
© 2021, Droits restant aux auteurs. Publié dans les actes de la conférence BDA 2021
(25-28 octobre 2021, En ligne, France). Redistribution de cet article autorisée selon les
termes de la licence Creative Commons CC-by-nc-nd 4.0.

