Current knowledge and future research opportunities for
modeling annual crop mixtures. A review
Noémie N. Gaudio, Abraham Escobar Gutierrez Escobar-Gutiérrez, Pierre

Casadebaig, Jochem Evers, Frederic F. Gerard, Gaëtan Louarn, Nathalie

Colbach, Sebastian Munz, Marie Launay, Hélène Marrou, et al.

To cite this version:

Noémie N. Gaudio, Abraham Escobar Gutierrez Escobar-Gutiérrez, Pierre Casadebaig, Jochem Ev-
ers, Frederic F. Gerard, et al.. Current knowledge and future research opportunities for modeling
annual crop mixtures. A review. Agronomy for Sustainable Development, 2019, 39 (2), pp.1-39.
￿10.1007/s13593-019-0562-6￿. ￿hal-02228974￿

HAL Id: hal-02228974

https://inria.hal.science/hal-02228974

Submitted on 1 Aug 2019

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

Agronomy for Sustainable Development (2019) 39: 20
https://doi.org/10.1007/s13593-019-0562-6

REVIEW ARTICLE

Current knowledge and future research opportunities for modeling
annual crop mixtures. A review

& Abraham J. Escobar-Gutiérrez 2 & Pierre Casadebaig 1 & Jochem B. Evers 3 & Frédéric Gérard 4 &

Noémie Gaudio 1
Gaëtan Louarn 2 & Nathalie Colbach 5 & Sebastian Munz 6 & Marie Launay 7 & Hélène Marrou 8 & Romain Barillot 2 &
Philippe Hinsinger 4 & Jacques-Eric Bergez 1 & Didier Combes 2 & Jean-Louis Durand 2 & Ela Frak 2 & Loïc Pagès 9 &
Christophe Pradal 10,11 & Sébastien Saint-Jean 12 & Wopke Van Der Werf 3 & Eric Justes 8

Accepted: 4 February 2019 / Published online: 8 March 2019
# L’

INRA and Springer-Verlag France SAS, part of Springer Nature 2019

Abstract
Growing mixtures of annual arable crop species or genotypes is a promising way to improve crop production without increasing
agricultural inputs. To design optimal crop mixtures, choices of species, genotypes, sowing proportion, plant arrangement, and
sowing date need to be made but field experiments alone are not sufficient to explore such a large range of factors. Crop modeling
allows to study, understand, and ultimately design cropping systems and is an established method for sole crops. Recently,
modeling started to be applied to annual crop mixtures as well. Here, we review to what extent crop simulation models and
individual-based models are suitable to capture and predict the specificities of annual crop mixtures. We argued that (1) the crop
mixture spatio-temporal heterogeneity (influencing the occurrence of ecological processes) determines the choice of the model-
ing approach (plant or crop centered). (2) Only few crop models (adapted from sole crop models) and individual-based models
currently exist to simulate annual crop mixtures. Crop models are mainly used to address issues related to both crop mixtures
management and the integration of crop mixtures into larger scales such as the rotation. In contrast, individual-based models are
mainly used to identify plant traits involved in crop mixture performance and to quantify the relative contribution of the different
ecological processes (niche complementarity, facilitation, competition, plasticity) to crop mixture functioning. This review
highlights that modeling of annual crop mixtures is in its infancy and gives to model users some important keys to choose the
model based on the questions they want to answer, with awareness of the strengths and weaknesses of each of the modeling
approaches.

Keywords Annual crop mixtures . Intercrops . Genotypes mixtures . Crop models . Individual-based models . Functional–
structural plant models . Model users

* Noémie Gaudio

noemie.gaudio@inra.fr

1 AGIR, University of Toulouse, INRA, Castanet-Tolosan, France
2

INRA, URP3F, Equipe Ecophysiologie des Plantes Fourragères, Le
Chêne – RD 150, BP 6, 86600 Lusignan, France

3 Centre for Crop Systems Analysis, Wageningen University and

Research, Wageningen, the Netherlands

4

Eco&Sols, University Montpellier, CIRAD, INRA, IRD, SupAgro,
Place Viala, 34060 Montpellier, France

5 Agroécologie, AgroSup Dijon, INRA, University Bourgogne

Franche-Comté, 21000 Dijon, France

7

INRA, US1116 AgroClim, Agroparc, 84914 Avignon Cedex
9, France

8 CIRAD, UMR SYSTEM, University Montpellier,

CIHEAM-IAMM, CIRAD, INRA, Montpellier Supagro,
34398 Montpellier, France

9

INRA, Centre PACA, UR PSH 1115, Agroparc, 84914 Avignon
Cedex 9, France

10 AGAP, University Montpellier, CIRAD, INRA, SupAgro,

Montpellier, France

11 CIRAD, AGAP, and INRIA Zenith, Univ Montpellier,

Montpellier, France

6 Department of Agronomy, Institute of Crop Science, University of

12 UMR ECOSYS INRA, AgroParisTech, Université Paris-Saclay,

Hohenheim, Stuttgart, Germany

78850 Thiverval-Grignon, France

20 Page 2 of 20

Agron. Sustain. Dev. (2019) 39: 20

Contents
1. Introduction
2. Classification of annual crop mixtures focusing on the spa-

tial scale of ecological processes
2.1. Spatio-temporal heterogeneity defines the types of an-

nual crop mixtures

2.2. Relative importance of ecological processes in the

three types of annual crop mixtures
3. General features of current modeling approaches

3.1. Crop models
3.2. Individual-based models

4. Using modeling to study annual crop mixtures
4.1. Different models for different purposes
4.2. Suitable management for annual crop mixtures: choos-
ing species, genotypes, sowing date and density, and
spatial arrangement

4.3. Plant traits involved in annual crop mixture performance
4.4. Representation and relative importance of ecological

processes

4.5. Complementarity of the modeling approaches

5. Conclusions and perspectives

Acknowledgments
References

1 Introduction

The discipline of crop modeling emerged in the 1950s
(Keating and Thorburn 2018) and is recognized as a crucial
and operational tool to support improvement of cropping sys-
tems. One of its main strengths is that it enables multiple
combinations of environments (climate and soil), genotypes,
and agricultural practices to be explored and compared based
on current knowledge of crop functioning in interaction with
the environment (Bergez et al. 2010; Boote et al. 2013;
Jeuffroy et al. 2014). A large scientific community supports
crop modeling in international consortia, such as AgMIP
(“Agricultural Model Intercomparison and Improvement
Project”; Rosenzweig et al. 2013), to develop, improve, and
evaluate models. For mainstream sole cropping systems (i.e.,
one genotype), crop modeling has been used to identify fac-
tors that limit crop productivity (e.g., Brisson et al. 2010),
assess environmental impacts of crops (e.g., Liu et al. 2016),
decrease inputs through improved management decisions
(e.g., maize crop irrigation, Bergez et al. 2001; wheat fertili-
zation, Chatelin et al. 2005), and aid breeding of new cultivars
(reviewed by Chenu et al. 2017). At the field scale, sole crops
are relatively homogeneous, especially when external inputs
are used. Currently, crop modeling is facing challenges be-
cause the agroecological transition involves changes in agri-
cultural practices (higher plant diversity, lower inputs, less
tillage, biological regulation, tolerating residual weeds, etc.),
which result in agroecosystems with greater complexity.

Increasing public concerns about human and environmental
health issues related to intensive agricultural systems over the
past 70 years in Western industrialized countries have
prompted policy makers and scientists to search for alternative
management strategies, such as more diversified cropping sys-
tems (Duru et al. 2015).

Increasing plant diversity in agriculture is suggested as a
pathway towards more resilient and sustainable production
systems (Lin 2011; Altieri et al. 2015; Raseduzzaman and
Jensen 2017). At the farm scale, diversification can occur by
diversifying crops in rotations (Gliessman 2014; Reckling
2016) and integrating agroecological pest (i.e., any organism
harmful for crops) management to decrease pesticide use at
farm and landscape scales (Lechenet et al. 2017; Hatt et al.
2018). At the field scale, plant diversity can increase using
within-field mixtures of at least two annual crop species
(i.e., intercropping; Fig. 1; Vandermeer 1989) or genotypes
of the same species, both hereafter referred to as “annual crop
mixtures.” Studies have demonstrated advantages of annual
crop mixtures compared to their corresponding sole crops
(reviewed by Lithourgidis et al. 2011; Bedoussac et al. 2015;
Brooker et al. 2015; Li-li et al. 2015 for species diversity and
Zeller et al. 2012; Creissen et al. 2016; Barot et al. 2017 for
genotype diversity). Recent reviews and meta-analyses sum-
marized the main ecosystem services they can deliver (Kiaer
et al. 2009; Malézieux et al. 2009; Kremen and Miles 2012;
Ehrmann and Ritz 2014; Altieri et al. 2015; Barot et al. 2017;
Duchene et al. 2017; Raseduzzaman and Jensen 2017),
highlighting their benefits for crop production (e.g., yield
quality, quantity and stability), improvement of soil biogeo-
chemistry (e.g., fertility, water flow regulation), improvement
of biological pest control, and climate regulation by mitigating
greenhouse gas emissions.

Despite the potential of annual crop mixtures, they are
under-represented in modern agriculture (Machado 2009;
Costanzo and Bàrberi 2014). Like for sole crops, modeling
could provide management guidelines to promote and opti-
mize their use. More specifically, designing productive and

Fig. 1 Relay-strip intercrop of maize and wheat in the Netherlands
(Source: J. Evers, Wageningen University and Research)

Agron. Sustain. Dev. (2019) 39: 20

Page 3 of 20 20

resilient crop mixtures is challenging, particularly with respect
to (i) the choice and proportions of species and genotypes
(Baxevanos et al. 2017) and (ii) their spatio-temporal arrange-
ment in the field (Wezel et al. 2014). Both are intended to
optimize plant–plant complementarities and positive interac-
tions while minimizing competition to best respond to the
existing environment in space and time (Hinsinger et al.
2011; Brooker et al. 2015, 2016). Nevertheless, if crop mix-
tures are not adequately managed, they may not provide more
benefits than sole crops (Brooker et al. 2015). In response,
models can analyze and promote the use of crop mixtures
(Malézieux et al. 2009) by guiding the design of plant arrange-
ment, the duration of temporal overlap, and plant characteris-
tics, as well as predicting crop mixtures behavior and the ser-
vices they deliver, and increasing understanding of their func-
tioning. Additionally, breeding, currently used to increase sole
crop performance, may not be optimal for crop mixtures, es-
pecially due to trait plasticity (Zhu et al. 2016; Kiaer and
Boesen 2018). Therefore, models could also help identify
ideotypes for crop mixtures and quantify the relative impor-
tance of trait values and plasticity (Litrico and Violle 2015).
Modeling of annual crop mixtures is under development,
and the few models that currently exist focus mainly on abiotic
resource partitioning. Two main modeling approaches are cur-
rently used: (i) process-based crop models, in which crop
characteristics are represented at the field scale (Launay
et al. 2009; Knörzer et al. 2011; Fayaud et al. 2014; Munz
et al. 2014; Gou et al. 2017b), and (ii) individual-based models
(IBMs), in which each plant is represented individually at
various levels of architectural realism (Garcia-Barrios et al.
2001; Potting et al. 2005; Postma and Lynch 2012; Barillot
et al. 2014b; Colbach et al. 2014b; Zhu et al. 2015). These
models have difficulty representing the specific characteristics
and complexity of crop mixtures because they may not
completely capture certain processes (complementarity, facil-
itation, resource partitioning, etc.) that influence crop mixture
performance. Therefore, it is necessary to assess whether
existing models can address the issues of annual crop mix-
tures. If not, existing models should be adapted or new models
and modeling approaches should be developed (Affholder
et al. 2012) to represent concepts of crop mixtures that differ
fundamentally from those of sole crops.

This paper aims at assessing suitable modeling approaches
to the issues of annual crop mixtures and at highlighting issues
that cannot be addressed by current models. Annual crop mix-
tures are classified based on spatio-temporal heterogeneity
and the assumption that agroecosystem heterogeneity influ-
ences the types of models and their corresponding formalisms.
A universal model applicable to all agroecosystems is not
feasible; therefore, model development depends on the system
and the issues considered (Sinclair and Seligman 1996;
Affholder et al. 2012). The key ecological processes within
crop mixtures are discussed, focusing on the spatial scale at

which they occur and their relative importance as a function of
the type of crop mixture. Then, the paper focuses on the ability
of existing models (crop models and IBMs) to represent the
types of crop mixtures identified. The main features and ap-
plications of each modeling approach are discussed. Our re-
view focuses particularly on analyzing strengths, weaknesses,
and the complementarity of existing models as an initial step
to help improving them in the future.

2 Classification of annual crop mixtures
focusing on the spatial scale of ecological
processes

We focused on mixtures of at least two annual cash crops in
which the spatio-temporal arrangement is particularly impor-
tant for both crops, thus excluding mixtures of a cash crop
(usually with a defined spatial arrangement) and a broadcast
undersown cover crop (e.g., Arim et al. 2006).

2.1 Spatio-temporal heterogeneity defines the types
of annual crop mixtures

Spatio-temporal arrangements and plant components (species/
genotypes) of crop mixtures are diverse (Gaba et al. 2015),
resulting in varying levels of heterogeneity within the crop.
Thus, a continuum exists within annual crops (Malézieux
et al. 2009), ranging from high crop homogeneity—sole crops
of a single genotype or genotype mixtures where genotypes
differ only in resistance to pests (Finckh et al. 2000; Tooker
and Frank 2012)—to high heterogeneity—crop mixtures of
species or genotypes with contrasting morphology and phe-
nology (Essah and Stoskopf 2002; Barillot et al. 2014a; Wang
et al. 2015; Montazeaud et al. 2017; Vidal et al. 2018).
Morphology is described by plant architecture (Godin 2000;
Bucksch et al. 2017), while phenology is related to the key
stages of plant development (from emergence to maturity,
Lieth 1974), keeping in mind that genotypes and species can
still differ by inherent physiological differences not related to
morphology and phenology (e.g., secondary metabolites de-
terring attacks from herbivores).

Three types of annual crop mixtures were defined accord-
ing to their level of heterogeneity (Fig. 2): type A, in which
plant components have similar phenologies and morphol-
ogies; type B, in which plant components have contrasting
morphologies but relatively similar phenologies; and type C,
in which plant components have contrasting phenologies and
morphologies.

Within this classification, spatio-temporal arrangements of
crop mixtures meet morphological and phenological hetero-
geneity requirements for harvest. For instance, relay-strip in-
tercrops of wheat and maize (type C) combine two species
with highly contrasting phenologies; therefore, they are

20 Page 4 of 20

Agron. Sustain. Dev. (2019) 39: 20

Fig. 2 Classification of annual crop mixtures based on a double gradient
of phenological and morphological heterogeneities. Morphological
heterogeneity is related to plant architecture, while phenological
heterogeneity is related to the level of asynchrony of key developmental
stages. Photos: (A) within-row mixture of three genotypes of sunflower
with contrasting degrees of pest resistance, France (Source: C. Bonnet,

INRA AGIR); (B1) within-row mixture of two genotypes of wheat,
France (Source: C. Gigot, INRA AgroParisTech EcoSys); (B2)
alternate-row mixture of wheat and pea, France (Source: L. Bedoussac,
ENSFEA, INRA AGIR); (C) relay-strip intercrop of wheat and maize, the
Netherlands (Source: J. Evers, Wageningen University and Research)

usually sown on different dates in alternate strips to maximize
resource use, which results in temporally separated harvests
(Li et al. 2001; Gao et al. 2010; Wang et al. 2015; Gou et al.
2017a). It is also the case with some mixtures of genotypes
despite these agroecosystems are rarely used in agriculture,
e.g., relay-strip mixture of spring- and summer-maize (Ning
et al. 2012). In contrast, homogeneous genotypes of rice (type
A; Han et al. 2016), morphologically different genotypes of
wheat (type B1; Vidal et al. 2018), or barley and pea (type B2;
Hauggaard-Nielsen et al. 2009) have phenologies similar
enough to be harvested at the same time. Thus, the sowing
arrangements most often used are within-row and alternate-
row mixtures, which create close plant–plant interactions.

2.2 Relative importance of ecological processes
in the three types of annual crop mixtures

The ability of crop mixtures to use abiotic resources de-
pends in part on several ecological processes (reviewed
by Brooker et al. 2015; Barot et al. 2017) which often

overlap throughout the growing cycle. Niche complemen-
tarities (Macarthur and Levins 1967) occur through niche
differentiation over time (Yu et al. 2015; Zhang et al.
2017; Dong et al. 2018) and/or space (Zhang et al.
2014; Montazeaud et al. 2017) and by using different
forms of the same resource, as illustrated for nitrogen
(N) uptake by cereal–legume mixtures (e.g., Hauggaard-
Nielsen et al. 2009) or for the preferential use of nitrate or
ammonium (Boudsocq et al. 2012); phenotypic plasticity
(Nicotra et al. 2010) which can contribute greatly to niche
complementarity (Callaway et al. 2003; Ashton et al.
2010; Zhu et al. 2015), e.g., root traits are extremely plas-
tic (Pagès 2011) and can behave differently when growing
in mixtures (e.g., Gonkhamdee et al. 2010 for maize
intercropped with rubber tree) so that if models exclude
plastic responses in root development as an emergent
property, simulating the distribution of roots of crop mix-
tures based on that of single crops could be irrelevant; and
positive interactions (i.e., facilitation, Callaway 1995),
e.g., one species can increase phosphorous (P) availability

Agron. Sustain. Dev. (2019) 39: 20

Page 5 of 20 20

in its rhizosphere and ultimately in the rhizosphere of a
neighboring species, provided that the two root systems
are intermingled (Gunes et al. 2007; Betencourt et al.
2012; Li et al. 2014; Bargaz et al. 2017). In addition,
the selection effect, also named the sampling effect
(Loreau and Hector 2001; Barot et al. 2017), could also
lead to overyielding. This is due to the fact that some
genotypes or species grow particularly well in given
cropping conditions. Thus, simulation models taken into
account plant phenology and autecology would be able to
consider and quantify this effect.

These ecological processes occur at different spatial scales
and with different intensities depending on cropping condi-
tions. In a given environment, their relative importance varies
according to the type of annual crop mixture, because spatio-
temporal arrangement determines the immediate neighbor-
hood of a target plant (Stoll and Weiner 2000; Table 1).
Regardless of the crop mixture type, and even for sole crops,
phenotypic plasticity is crucial for adapting to the local envi-
ronment and its constraints. The three types of crop mixtures
can be considered a logical sequence (type A → type B →
type C) by successively adding processes and complexity to
account for.

In mixtures with homogeneous genotypes (type A), all
individual plants experience approximately the same local
abiotic environment, ignoring (i) spatial heterogeneity
caused by emergence conditions and pests and (ii) border
effects, such as those of surrounding hedges or grass
strips. For type A crop mixtures, above- and belowground
competition may be nearly the same for all plants and
depend on the density of a given crop in a given environ-
ment. In general, no facilitation or niche complementarity
for abiotic resources can occur. However, facilitation-like
mechanisms can occur through a decrease in pests due to
contrasting degrees of resistance (Barot et al. 2017).
Predicting this specific process and its dynamics would
require distinguishing each plant.

Next in the sequence, in alternate-row and within-row
mixtures (type B), crops with contrasting morphology are
closely mixed. Therefore, above- and belowground inter-
actions (i.e., competition and facilitation) and comple-
mentarity for resource use are important for predicting
crop mixture functioning and performances, such as
yield and other ecosystem services. For example,
modeling belowground niche complementarity in space,
Postma and Lynch (2012) predicted that in closely spaced
mixtures of maize-bean-squash (type B), different root
architectures (Fig. 3) allow crop mixtures to forage for
nutrients throughout the soil profile more efficiently than
a single genotype/species. The functioning of a target
plant is determined by its neighborhood, with a high prob-
ability of being close to a neighbor from another species
or genotype according to the relative density of the plant

components. Alternate-row mixtures with contrasting de-
grees of resistance strengthen facilitation against pests,
since non-host crop rows serve as physical barriers to pest
movement between host rows (Finckh et al. 2000). The
scale (individual or population) at which these ecological
processes should be considered, however, depends on the
specific issue addressed.

The main additional feature that distinguishes relay-
strip crop mixtures (type C) from the other two types is
the strong border-row effect between two strips, due to
interactions between the two crops as they grow.
Competition for light (Yang et al. 2017) or belowground
resources (Lv et al. 2014) can predominate, depending on
the plant components, their water and nutrient status, and
their spatio-temporal arrangement (e.g., number of rows,
orientation). However, it is assumed that belowground
facilitation and complementarity for N, which occur at
local scales, can have a strong influence only at the border
between two strips, i.e., the wider the strip, the lower the
effects. For belowground resources, especially P, the
strongest effect of increased P use in faba bean–maize
relay-strip intercrops was linked to decomposition of roots
of the species harvested first (Li et al. 2003) and to slight
direct facilitation during co-growth. As Raynaud et al.
(2008) modeled, roots must be intimately mixed for P
facilitation given the small scale of the underlying rhizo-
sphere processes (Hinsinger et al. 2011). Temporal niche
complementarity is the main ecological process involved
in relay-strip crop mixtures (Yu et al. 2015). Several stud-
ies showed that wheat overyielding in wheat–maize relay-
strip intercrops was due mainly to increased growth of
border-row plants, while inner-row plants behaved like
those in wheat sole crops (Knörzer et al. 2010; Gou
et al. 2016; Zhu et al. 2016). Wheat border rows received
more light
than inner rows before maize emerged,
resulting in greater light use efficiency in crop mixtures
than in sole crops. This highlights the need to consider the
spatial pattern of relay-strip crop mixtures explicitly.

Whatever the crop mixture type, the local environment
determines which functional complementarities between
plants sustain growth and production under resource limi-
tation. For instance, when N, water, or P is the main limit-
ing resource, then complementarity for N use between le-
gume and non-legume species (Hauggaard-Nielsen et al.
2009), for water use between C3 and C4 species (Mao
et al. 2012), or for P use between P- and non-P-
mobilizing species (Li et al. 2014) becomes the most ad-
vantageous, respectively. This first environmental filter
(Keddy 1992) guides the choice of the mixture components
and occurs at the species level and not the genotype level
because it is influenced by general properties of a species
that are shared by all of its genotypes, thus defining coarse
plant functional types (Ustin and Gamon 2010).

20 Page 6 of 20

Agron. Sustain. Dev. (2019) 39: 20

Table 1 Main ecological processes involved in abiotic resource
partitioning in the three types of annual crop mixtures (types A, B, C)
in a given environment. Their occurrence in the three types of crop

mixtures and the main influencing factors are described. For the
schematic representation, Crop 1 = black circle, Crop 2 = black star,
Target plant 1 = green, and Target plant 2 = red

Type A

Type B

Type C

occurrence

x

x

x

Above- and 
belowground 
competition (intra-
and interspecific / 
genotypes)

Phenotypic plasticity

Spatial 
complementarity for 
belowground 
resources

Complementarity for 
resource use

Facilitation 

influenced 
by

occurrence
influenced 
by
occurrence

influenced 
by

occurrence
influenced 
by
occurrence
influenced 
by

Representation from 
a target plant point of 
view (direct 
neighborhood)

Sowing density.

Sowing density, 
proportion of each 
mixture component,
and competitive ability 
(Goldberg 1990).

Sowing density, proportion 
of each mixture 
component, competitive 
ability, and row position in 
a given strip.

x

x

x

Each mixture component sensitivity to the environment, their response range, 
and direct neighborhood.

x

x

Root system architecture of each mixture 
component, and direct neighborhood.

x

x

Functional types characterizing each mixture 
component.
x

x

Functional types characterizing each mixture 
component, and the direct neighborhood.

A given plant is 
surrounded by plants 
with similar 
characteristics. All 
plants encounter 
almost the same 
environment and 
neighborhood, i.e. one 
average plant can be 
considered as 
representative of the 
whole crop. This is true 
except for plants 
located at the border of 
the field.

Each plant 1 is at 
least surrounded by 
one plant 2 in the 
case of alternate row 
mixtures and with a 
high probability in the 
case of within-row 
mixtures. This 
probability depends 
on the relative 
proportion of the two 
plant types.

Alternate rows

The direct neighborhood 
of a target plant 1 growing 
in a given row can be 
either plant 1 or plant 2 
depending on the position 
of the row within a given 
strip. Plants growing on 
the border rows 
experience a reduced 
neighborhood during part 
of their growing cycle.

Schematic 
representation

Within-row

Agron. Sustain. Dev. (2019) 39: 20

Page 7 of 20 20

Fig. 3 Illustration of two root systems with contrasting architecture: a wheat, with a branching root system, and b pea, with a taproot system, simulated
with the root model ArchiSimple (Pagès et al. 2014)

3 General features of current modeling
approaches

3.1 Crop models

Crop models were developed to simulate soil–plant–atmosphere
interactions by considering environmental variables (climate,
soil, and management practices), species or genotype-specific
traits, and their response to the environment (reviewed by
Boote et al. 2013; Jeuffroy et al. 2014 for sole crops). They
accurately simulate observed genotype–environment interac-
tions for a range of genotypes in multi-environment trials (e.g.,
for sunflower, Casadebaig et al. 2016a). One main strength of
these models is that they consider the effects of several abiotic
stresses (e.g., water, N, temperature) and their interactions on
crop performance (Fig. 4 illustrates how a variation in plant trait
values impacts crop yield, in a large diversity of cropping con-
ditions), providing a quantitative estimate at a relevant scale
(e.g., yield ha−1). Therefore, they are potentially relevant for
addressing the performance of crop mixtures compared to that
of sole crops under a variety of environmental conditions, such
as drought or nutrient limitations (Hughes and Stachowicz 2004;
Holmgren and Scheffer 2010; Hautier et al. 2014).

Most crop models, however, initially simulated only sole
crops, assuming a continuous canopy across the field and often
ignoring spatial heterogeneity. Many models represent the entire
canopy as a single leaf (in “big leaf” models) and use the Beer–
Lambert law to simulate its light interception (Sinoquet et al.
1990; Monsi and Saeki 2005). Some models represent vertical
spatial heterogeneity by distinguishing several canopy layers
(e.g., SUNFLO, Casadebaig et al. 2011) or using leaf-to-
canopy approaches for light interception and carbon assimilation

(Boote et al. 2013). The underlying assumption that the canopy
is homogeneous vertically and continuous horizontally is often a
robust approach to simulate sole crop growth (Chenu et al.
2017). Competition is influenced by density (Evers et al. 2006;
Baccar et al. 2011; Dornbusch et al. 2011), with the caveat that
density dependence is fixed or weakly parameterized in many
crop models (e.g., Brisson et al. 2008).

An initial strategy to simulate crop mixtures involved mod-
ifying how one crop senses its environment by altering envi-
ronmental variables according to predictions of another sole
crop model (i.e., successively running individual sole crop
models; Monzon et al. 2007) or external calculations
(Knörzer et al. 2010; Munz et al. 2014). After calculating
the impact of crop 1 on the environment, the modified envi-
ronmental variables are used to simulate crop 2. This method-
ology is used when the study focuses only on crop 2, with no
retroaction on crop 1.

A few crop models, such as APSIM (Agricultural
Production Systems sIMulator; Holzworth et al. 2014),
CROPSYST (Cropping Systems Simulation Model; Singh
et al. 2013), FASSET (Farm ASSEssment Tool; Berntsen
et al. 2004), and STICS (Simulateur mulTIdisciplinaire pour
les Cultures Standard; Brisson et al. 2004), added sub-
modules to represent competition for abiotic resources by an-
nual crop mixtures (reviewed by Chimonyo et al. 2015). They
assumed that the canopy is composed of two species instead
of one, either ignoring the spatial configuration of the two
crops’ canopies (i.e., by simulating a shared canopy;
APSIM, CROPSYST, FASSET) or explicitly representing it.
The latter approach, restricted to situations in which the two
crops were side by side (e.g., in alternate rows), was used only
in a few models, e.g., STICS. These models used a

20 Page 8 of 20

Agron. Sustain. Dev. (2019) 39: 20

Fig. 4 Sensitivity index of crop yield for selected traits involved in crop
development (a) and resource acquisition (b) relative to seasonal water
stress indices. Crop modeling and simulation can be used to quantify in
silico the impact of a variation in plant traits on crop yield, for diverse
cropping conditions. The results from a sensitivity analysis are illustrated
for a sub-set of two traits for the wheat crop in Australia: the thermal time
required to reach floral initiation (“Development”) and the water

“hedgerow” approach: a 2D representation of row geometry to
calculate light interception by row crop canopies. Simulation
of an alternate-row crop mixture of leek and celery using the
two approaches (homogeneous horizontal leaf area distribu-
tion vs. row geometry) demonstrated, however, that they
could simulate light partitioning equally well (INTERCOM,
Baumann et al. 2002). These results indicate the need for more
frequent assessment of the advantages of making models more
complex. All these models seem to simulate canopy growth,
particularly leaf area index, less accurately, but simulate nutri-
ent cycling well (Berntsen et al. 2004; Corre-Hellou et al.
2007, 2009).

More recently, crop models were specifically developed to
simulate annual crop mixtures in alternate strips (Wang et al.
2015; Gou et al. 2017b; Liu et al. 2017), with particular focus
on the temporal sequence of their phenological phases. These
models distinguish the phases during which plant components
grow separately (equivalent to a sole crop, but interspersed
with strips of empty space due to the space needed for the
companion species) from phases of co-growth (with two plant
species being present simultaneously). These models calculate
the light partitioning between the plant components in the
intercrop based on a mathematical model that takes into ac-
count the block structure and strip-path geometry of the crop
mixture (Goudriaan 1977; Pronk et al. 2003). They give quite
different results than a standard Beer–Lambert law for light
interception in a mixed canopy that does not take the block
structure and strip-way geometry into account (Gou et al.
2017b). They thus represent temporal niche complementarity

extractability by roots (“Resource acquisition”). Points correspond to
sampled cropping conditions (1500 combinations of sites × year ×
management options). Colors indicate representative drought–pattern
environment types occurring in the Australian wheat belt (Chenu et al.
2013). Lines represent linear regressions fitted by environment types.
Source: Casadebaig et al. (2016b)

for light use, but the border-row effect is ignored because each
strip is considered as homogeneous cover, i.e., no distinction
between inner and border rows of a strip.

While light competition is always represented (appropriate-
ly or not) in models of crop mixtures, competition for below-
ground resources taken up by roots is not, which remains a
main weakness of these models. Belowground competition
can have a larger effect than aboveground competition
(Wilson 1988), especially when inputs decrease. Most crop
models are based on the Monteith equation (1977), which
considers intercepted light the driving force of crop growth.
However, most crop models do not simulate root biomass or
density in soil layers and represent soil and its spatial hetero-
geneity coarsely. Consequently, direct interactions between
rooting systems are virtually ignored in some crop models
adapted for annual crop mixtures (e.g., Gou et al. 2017b) but
can be accounted for indirectly. Root systems can be repre-
sented with species- or genotype-specific parameters, such as
root depth and density distribution throughout the soil profile,
e.g., STICS or BISWAT (Bertrand et al. 2018). Thus, soil
resources taken up by one crop change the abiotic stress and
thus the specific growth response of the second crop. When
the soil is represented as several layers, responses can be sim-
ulated as preferential root growth in soil layers with higher
water or nutrient content or as an increase in other processes,
such as biological N2 fixation for legumes instead of soil min-
eral N uptake. In this way, basic spatial niche complementarity
for water and N between two plant components can be indi-
rectly simulated.

Agron. Sustain. Dev. (2019) 39: 20

3.2 Individual-based models

IBMs of plant communities have long been useful in ecology
to test theories and hypotheses (Huston et al. 1988; Railsback
and Grimm 2012; Evers et al. 2018a). They include popula-
tion dynamics models, with simulations of annual (e.g., Zhu
et al. 2015) or multi-annual growth cycles (and thus multiple
generations of plants, e.g., Colbach et al. 2014a). IBMs rep-
resent populations made up of individuals, usually spatially
explicit, that may differ from one another. Most IBMs explic-
itly represent local interactions, individual variability, and the
heterogeneity of resource partitioning within the field and the
crop (reviewed by Grimm and Railsback 2005; Berger et al.
2008; Vos et al. 2010; Dunbabin et al. 2013). Plant architec-
ture is represented at varying levels of detail (e.g., sub-organ,
organ, phytomer, axis, and plant for shoot architecture; root
segment and root system for root architecture), with the
smallest-scale IBMs integrating the topological and spatial
organization of a plant’s modular structure, i.e., functional–
structural plant models (FSPMs, Fourcaud et al. 2008; Vos
et al. 2010; DeJong et al. 2011). Regardless of the degree of
detail used to represent the plant, IBMs (i) require many pa-
rameters, which makes it difficult to generalize their use, (ii)
require laborious data collection, and (iii) have high compu-
tational cost. Moreover, a recurring difficulty in modeling
concerns the scaling up from one hierarchical level of organi-
zation to another and whether such levels are strongly identi-
fied in biological systems (Potochnik and McGill 2012).
Given the complexity of most IBMs, they cannot be easily
scaled up to address issues at large spatial scales (larger than
the plot level) over long periods of time (Purves et al. 2008).
Consequently, a great difficulty lies, for example, in scaling up
from an IBM to an estimate of annual crop yield.

IBMs have been used in forestry and agronomy to predict
dynamics of cultivated plant communities, such as multi-
species grasslands (Soussana et al. 2012; Louarn et al. 2014;
Durand et al. 2016; Faverjon et al. 2018), mixed forests (Liu
and Ashton 1995; Chave 1999; Pérot and Picard 2012), and
crop–weed mixtures (Colbach et al. 2014b; Evers and
Bastiaans 2016; Renton and Chauhan 2017). IBMs have rare-
ly been applied to annual crop mixtures, however, in part
because so few IBMs exist that can simulate them. We iden-
tified three IBMs (Garcia-Barrios et al. 2001; Potting et al.
2005; FLORSYS, Colbach et al. 2014b) that simulate only
aboveground interactions for light and four FSPMs that sim-
ulate only above- (Fig. 5; Barillot et al. 2014b; Zhu et al. 2015)
or belowground (SimRoot, Postma and Lynch 2012; Min3P-
ArchiSimple, Gérard et al. 2018) compartments, even though
FSPMs have considerable potential to simulate species mix-
tures (Evers et al. 2018b). Aboveground FSPMs mainly ad-
dress competition for light, but recent efforts have been made
to include other processes, e.g., Barillot et al. (2018) used a
comprehensive FSPM to assess C-N acquisition, allocation,

Page 9 of 20 20

and grain yield of theoretical wheat genotype mixtures of
plants that only differ in leaf inclination.

While all IBMs account to some extent for plant geometry
(as a volume or surface), IBMs that are FSPMs also represent
plant topology and detailed 3D architecture explicitly. Once
plant geometry is calculated from input parameters (e.g., phyl-
lotaxis, leaf and tiller angles and curvature), microclimate and
phylloclimate can be calculated at the organ scale rather than
at the plant scale (Chelle 2005).

Resource partitioning between plants is more sophisticated
in IBMs than in crop models, with the degree of complexity
often linked to the spatial resolution of the canopy and root
system. For instance, light partitioning can be simulated (i) at
the voxel (3D pixel) scale in voxel-based IBMs that then use
the Beer–Lambert law at a very fine scale of a few centimeters
to meet the law’s assumptions of homogeneous cover
(Sinoquet et al. 2001; Munier-Jolain et al. 2013) or (ii) by
connecting the plant model to a surface-based radiative trans-
fer sub-model to predict light balance (transmission and ab-
sorption) inside the canopy at the organ scale (Chelle and
Andrieu 1999; Röhrig et al. 1999; Barillot et al. 2014b).

As crop models, most IBMs represent belowground inter-
actions inadequately. Except for belowground IBMs, no be-
lowground interactions, even indirect, are included in current
IBMs that simulate annual crop mixtures. Thus, the below-
ground IBMs applied to crop mixtures are apparently limited
to a few of the FSPMs reviewed by Dunbabin et al. (2013).
Most of them focus on root architecture and its impact on
resource partitioning (e.g., SimRoot, Postma and Lynch
2012), leaving aside for the moment what relates to soil biota
such as mycorrhizae and bacteria. More recently, the model
Min3P-ArchiSimple (Gérard et al. 2017), which combines the
architectural root IBM ArchiSimple (Pagès et al. 2014) and
the soil reactive-transport model Min3P (Gérard et al. 2008),
was used to simulate pH changes in the root zone of two
representative intercropped legumes and cereals (Gérard
et al. 2018).

More particularly, aboveground FSPMs ignore below-
ground interactions (and vice versa for belowground
FSPMs), whereas the link between above- and belowground
processes underlies many benefits of crop mixtures; however,
predicting mixture performance based on both above- and
belowground resource partitioning is an objective of the cur-
rent European Union project ReMIX (https://www.remix-
intercrops.eu/).

Few IBMs, however, include some crop model modules,
thus connecting a detailed representation of aboveground
plant parts to simpler representations of roots and soil, which
can be useful when competition for light is strong or spatially
heterogeneous and competition for soil resources is restricted
to mobile elements (i.e., water, mineral N) or negligible com-
pared to competition for light. For instance, soil modules of
the crop model STICS are used in FLORSYS to predict soil N

20 Page 10 of 20

Fig. 5 Illustrations of (left)
horizontal and (right) vertical
views of a virtual wheat–pea
mixture. The color gradient (from
blue to red) indicates the amount
of light intercepted by plant
organs. Source: Barillot (2012)

Agron. Sustain. Dev. (2019) 39: 20

and water which are then uptake by individual plants, with a
feedback enabling to reinitialize the soil characteristics for the
day after. The opposite is observed for the model SPACSYS
(Wu et al. 2007; Zhang et al. 2016), which represents canopy
and soil functioning in the same way as crop models but uses
an additional IBM sub-module to represent root architecture.

4 Using modeling to study annual crop
mixtures

4.1 Different models for different purposes

Several recent reviews suggested that models simulating het-
erogeneous annual crop mixtures could be improved by
representing complex and dynamic spatio-temporal interac-
tions among plants, as well as phenotypic plasticity
(Malézieux et al. 2009; Fletcher et al. 2016). This implicitly
suggests that IBMs are more suitable than crop models for
simulating crop mixtures. Making models more complex has
a cost, however, and models of different resolutions are de-
signed to address different issues. Consequently, several
models that differ in the level of detail need to be used to study
a given system (Evans et al. 2013; Li-li et al. 2015), with a
gradient from empirical to more mechanistic models, depend-
ing on the underlying objective (Passioura 1996).
Consequently, the strengths and weaknesses of crop models
and IBMs are inherently complementary. Hereafter, the main
issues of annual crop mixtures that each modeling approach
can currently address are illustrated, when possible, with ex-
amples of model applications. These issues are related to an-
nual crop mixtures agricultural management and to the traits

and the relative importance of ecological processes involved
in crop mixtures performance.

4.2 Suitable management for annual crop mixtures:
choosing species, genotypes, sowing date
and density, and spatial arrangement

The spatio-temporal arrangement of annual crop mixtures in-
fluences crop yield directly through resource partitioning and
indirectly through regulation of pests (Ratnadass et al. 2012;
Boudreau 2013; Hatt et al. 2018). This issue is partially ad-
dressed by crop models and IBMs that simulate agricultural
practices.

None of these crop models simulates more than two crops
growing together, which is the most common situation for
annual crop mixtures on farms. The model chosen must rep-
resent the spatial arrangement of the crop mixture simulated
(closely mixed vs. relay-strip). In contrast, IBMs enable theo-
retical testing of all species and genotype combinations, re-
gardless of the number of plant components and their spatial
arrangement, under the condition that the IBMs represent the
functions and specific characteristics of the mixed species or
genotypes.

These models do not include rules to decide which species
and genotypes to combine for a given soil and climate. This
decision can be made by simulating many different agronomic
situations to identify potential species/genotype combinations.
This is possible only when the model has a minimum degree
of genericity, which is the case for certain crop models (e.g.,
STICS and APSIM parameterize 15 and 24 annual cash crops,
respectively, with genotype-specific parameterization for phe-
nology) and IBMs (e.g., FLORSYS parameterizes 14 annual
cash crops, with genotype-specific parameterization for

Agron. Sustain. Dev. (2019) 39: 20

Page 11 of 20 20

wheat, field bean and pea). However, among IBMs, most
FSPMs are species-specific.

In addition to sowing dates and densities, which most
models usually represent, a specific strength of most crop
models is that they consider other agricultural practices, such
as fertilization, tillage, and irrigation; IBMs typically do not
consider these practices. Thus, crop models have been used
mainly to test the influence of a variety of agricultural prac-
tices and cropping conditions on the relative performance
(yield quantity and quality) and resource-use efficiency of
annual crop mixtures compared to their corresponding sole
crops. For instance, simulations were performed to quantify
impacts of crop mixture sowing densities and dates (Corre-
Hellou et al. 2009; Fayaud et al. 2014) and to test fertilization
options (Corre-Hellou et al. 2007, 2009) and water regimes
(Chimonyo et al. 2016). Few crop models have been used to
simulate annual crop mixtures in more integrated farming sys-
tems that have planning horizons longer than 1 year. Launay
et al. (2009) used STICS to assess bi-specific pea–barley in-
tercrop sown in alternate rows to improve N use efficiency by
using sowing dates and densities and crop rotation (preceding
crop and soil). Crop models that include a soil component and
N residue management can simulate carbon and N cycles and
thus indirect N transfer through decomposition and minerali-
zation of plant residues, which could have a positive long-
term effect, e.g., Fletcher et al. (2015) demonstrated that N
fixation in a wheat–pea intercrop can lead to yield improve-
ments in subsequent wheat crops.

For the additional border-row effect in relay-strip crop mix-
tures, simulations were performed to quantify the effect of
strip width (defined by the number of rows and inter-row
distance) on light use efficiency and yield of wheat–maize
intercrops (Wang et al. 2015; Gou et al. 2017b). The effect
of diverse crop phenology on crop yield in wheat–soybean
intercrops was also evaluated under a variety of soil and cli-
mate conditions (Monzon et al. 2007).

Even though simulation studies illustrate the relevance and
ability of crop models to simulate annual crop mixtures, these
models are often not evaluated with independent data (e.g.,
Corre-Hellou et al. 2007, 2009) and thus might be over-fitted
to calibration data (e.g., Chimonyo et al. 2016), which is a
common problem in modeling (Sinclair and Seligman 2000;
Seidel et al. 2018).

Crop models usually do not represent multiple biotic stress-
es, which is a clear limitation to using them to simulate low-
input or organic cropping systems. One way to represent
plant–pest interactions is to combine crop models with pest
models, as is done for sole crops (Boote et al. 1983; Robert
et al. 2004). Generally, IBMs consider biotic stresses. For
example, an explicit 3D plant canopy simulated by an FSPM
can help quantify the influence of the mixture on pest dynam-
ics in homogeneous genotype mixture (e.g., Gigot et al. 2014
for wheat genotype mixture); Colbach et al. (2014b) used

FLORSYS to test several crop mixtures as a function of species
choice, sowing date and arrangement, focusing on weed-
induced yield loss and weed biomass during the test year
and the following 10 years; Potting et al. (2005) developed a
simple agent-based IBM to study effects of the proportion of a
sensitive crop vs. a non-sensitive crop and the spatial arrange-
ment of the resulting mixture to predict the behavior and dy-
namics of herbivorous insects.

4.3 Plant traits involved in annual crop mixture
performance

Breeding programs focus on optimizing agronomic perfor-
mance (e.g., yield quantity and quality, pest resistance, re-
source use efficiency) in a sole crop context; however, the
performance-related traits of mixtures might differ due to spe-
cific plant–plant interactions and complementarities (Litrico
and Violle 2015). IBMs that are FSPMs can often identify
these traits.

Several descriptive FSPMs have been developed with this
objective, i.e., to replicate the plant structure (shoots or roots)
observed from specific experimental measurements. Due to
their detailed structural representation, these models provide
insights into physical interactions between plant structure and
usually a single environmental factor such as light, water, N,
or pests. For instance, to simulate closely spaced wheat–pea
mixtures and determine the influence of several architectural
traits on light partitioning, Barillot et al. (2014b) used a de-
scriptive FSPM composed of a wheat model (ADEL-Wheat,
Fournier et al. 2003), a pea model (L-Pea, Barillot et al.
2014b), and a radiative balance model (CARIBU, Chelle
and Andrieu 1998). More specifically, their study quantified
the relative influence of leaf area index (influenced by the
number of branches/tillers), plant height (reflected by inter-
node length), and leaf geometry (reflected by leaf angle) on
the mixture’s light interception. Similarly, but for relay-strip
wheat–maize intercrops, Zhu et al. (2015) performed simula-
tions to identify the relative importance of phenotypic plastic-
ity in key architectural traits (e.g., tillering, leaf size, leaf azi-
muth, leaf angle) vs. crop structure in light interception.

For the root system, the model SimRoot was used to sim-
ulate closely spaced dense mixtures of maize–bean–squash
(Postma and Lynch 2012) to analyze the influence of architec-
tural root traits and complementarity on crop mixture func-
tioning and to focus on the importance of biological rhizo-
sphere processes as a function of nutrient limitation (N, P, K).
These findings could help breeders prioritize traits and de-
termine the data most essential to collect in field experiments.
Complex traits such as height that are used in more integrated
models are separated into finer traits in FSPMs, which helps to
understand more mechanistically which traits are involved in
resource partitioning and thus in plant performance.

20 Page 12 of 20

Agron. Sustain. Dev. (2019) 39: 20

Due to the descriptive nature of these models, emergent
effects (such as plasticity) of crop mixtures on crop perfor-
mance cannot be simulated because plant growth and devel-
opment are inferred from experiments (e.g., no physiological
processes are behind architectural plasticity as plasticity is
hard-coded in the model), meaning that a new set of parame-
ters is required for each situation.

4.4 Representation and relative importance
of ecological processes

Ecological processes, such as phenotypic plasticity, facilita-
tion, and competition, are included in models that use descrip-
tive functions (usually crop models) or dose–response type
relationships (usually IBMs). In the latter, ecological process-
es are emergent properties of the model, i.e., the result of
modeling plants’ resource acquisition and signaling.
Depending on how ecological processes are represented (de-
scriptive vs. emergent), parameterization conditions greatly
influence model accuracy and genericity.

Since crop models tend to use empirical relationships to
represent ecological processes, using model components such
as plant-related parameters developed for a sole crop might
have limitations (e.g., Baumann et al. 2002; Corre-Hellou
et al. 2009), and their values may change in crop mixtures
due to plant–plant interactions. Consequently, parameters of
model components should be estimated or measured for mix-
tures. Although IBMs are also parameterized from isolated
plants or sole crops (except by Zhu et al. 2015), the parame-
terization conditions are less important since these ecological
processes are supposed to be emergent properties that do not
depend on the presence or identity of neighboring plants.
Nevertheless, since all models are simplifications, some for-
malisms remain empirical, and the extent to which emergent
properties are robust is often unclear, especially when
simulating a variety of agricultural conditions. Thus, in
addition to evaluating model accuracy for main output
variables, model evaluation should also focus on ecological
processes themselves. For instance, for sole crops, Casadebaig
et al. (2011) used standard accuracy metrics to evaluate a crop
model and showed that while the model did simulate pheno-
typic plasticity, its intensity was weaker than that observed in
the experimental dataset.

Crop models cannot mimic phenotypic plasticity of each
species (or genotype) within the mixture, but some are able to
simulate cover plasticity as an emergent property of crop mix-
tures due to light, water, or nutrient interactions and their
effects on crop growth. However, improved knowledge of
the underlying processes is required, as are specific experi-
ments to identify these mechanisms (Barot et al. 2017). This
could provide lower and upper bounds of plastic functional
traits that correspond to crop model parameters. Assuming
that the relevant functional traits (relevant according to the

issue addressed by the model) are known, that their range is
quantified (phenotypic plasticity), and that they correspond to
crop model parameters, the way each species/genotype ex-
presses phenotypic plasticity could be determined by optimiz-
ing the algorithms applied to the model in the chosen
environments.

More mechanistic IBMs can represent “generic” responses
of plants to their environment (e.g., photosynthesis to light, or
leaf growth to temperature; Barillot et al. 2016 illustrate this
for wheat). In these IBMs, plant plasticity in response to con-
trasting environments is an emergent property. Current IBMs
do not represent the functions responsible for belowground
facilitation for abiotic resources, as previously defined.
Some FSPMs are promising tools to simulate belowground
facilitation mechanistically. For instance, the model Min3P-
ArchiSimple was used to simulate adjacent legume and cereal
root systems with varying distances between plants (35 and
5 cm). Preliminary results highlighted that dissolved P in-
creased and pH decreased in the cereal’s rhizosphere, while
the opposite trend occurred in the legume’s rhizosphere
(Fig. 6), depending on the distance between the two species
(Gérard et al. 2018). Similarly, facilitation for P or other rhi-
zosphere processes could be quantified based on soil condi-
tions. Currently, only theoretical applications have been
performed.

Mechanistic IBMs are useful to identify the relative impor-
tance of ecological processes in the functioning and
performance of crop mixtures. For instance, Zhu et al.
(2015) simulated a relay-strip crop mixture of wheat and
maize with or without plasticity, based on empirical values
of traits. The results indicated that light interception efficiency
was 23% higher in crop mixtures than in sole crops, and with-
in the 23%, 64% was due to plasticity, and only 36% resulted
from crop structure. Thus, a model that does not explicitly
simulate plasticity would fail to capture the main benefits of
crop mixtures. Similarly, Postma and Lynch (2012) illustrated
that the benefits of closely spaced mixtures for N uptake and
biomass production emerged only when root architecture was
represented because they depend on spatial complementarity
among roots. Likewise, modeling could help to disentangle
and better analyze and understand the relative importance of
the complementarity and “selection effects” in overyielding of
annual crop mixtures, which remains a research perspective
not yet addressed.

4.5 Complementarity of the modeling approaches

The two modeling approaches are complementary, and having
suitable modeling infrastructure can increase their use. As an
example, IBMs could be used to assert certain empirical
assumptions used in crop models. Barillot et al. (2011) illus-
trated a reassuring example in a study that assessed the “ho-
mogeneous canopy” assumption for mixtures. The authors

Agron. Sustain. Dev. (2019) 39: 20

a

Root surface density
(m2/m3)

)

m

(

z

b

)

m

(

z

x (m)
Root surface density
(m2/m3)

pH

x (m)

pH

)

m

(

z

)

m

(

z

Page 13 of 20 20

Dissolved P concentra(cid:2)on 
(mol/lwater)

)

m

(

z

)

m

(

z

x (m)

Dissolved P concentra(cid:2)on 
(mol/lwater)

x (m)

x (m)

x (m)

Fig. 6 Results of the Min3P-ArchiSimple model used to simulate two species (cereal and legume) planted in an alkaline soil (Gérard et al. 2017). The
example represents 60 days of simulation and a planting distance of a 35 cm and b 5 cm

used simulation to show that the “turbid medium” analogy
could be used successfully for a wide range of crop mixtures.
More detailed representation (more vertical layers or 3D de-
scription) of the canopy, however, slightly improved the pre-
diction of light interception efficiency of mixtures with verti-
cal stratification and overlapping foliage. This study validates
the assumption of the “big leaf” approach used in all crop
models.

High expectations of IBMs are based on their ability to
quantify the contribution of ecological processes or the impor-
tance of given functional traits to crop mixture functioning,
which could encourage their use in crop models. When need-
ed, important processes highlighted from IBMs could be sum-
marized by functional relationships (Escobar-Gutiérrez et al.
2009) and be added to crop models. Therefore, IBMs could
help improve crop models; however, as mentioned, to be pa-
rameterized and calibrated, they require many field data,
which are time-consuming, difficult, or sometimes impossible
to measure. A promising tool to render these models more
usable is phenotyping of sole crops and crop mixtures
(Bucksch et al. 2014). For instance, multi-genotype canopies
of thousands plants have been simulated in 3D from a pheno-
typing platform to estimate light interception and light use
efficiency (Cabrera-Bosquet et al. 2016; Chen et al. 2018).
Similarly, IBM calibrations obtained from isolated plant phe-
notyping were also shown able to predict the outcome of

competitive interactions between contrasting genotypes
(Faverjon et al. 2018).

5 Conclusions and perspectives

We assert that models would be useful tools to understand and
predict the functioning of annual crop mixtures and to help
designing these agroecosystems, as a complement to field
experiments, keeping in mind that experiments are crucial to
improve and refine simulation models, whereas models are
useful to guide experiments and test all possible plant-
environment combinations (Craufurd et al. 2013; Reynolds
et al. 2018; Rötter et al. 2018). However, modeling of annual
crop mixtures is still in its infancy, and most modeling studies
focus on model evaluation (Gou et al. 2017b) or the evaluation
of sole crop models extended to crop mixtures, in particular
for bi-specific mixture of annual crops (Corre-Hellou et al.
2009; Knörzer et al. 2010; Munz et al. 2014). Use of modeling
remains limited in part because models are not yet completely
operational, indicating the need to increase understanding of
the ecological processes that influence crop mixture function-
ing before simulating them. A large scientific effort has fo-
cused on modeling sole crops. For instance, many modelers
have focused on defining the most relevant parameters for sole
crops (Martre et al. 2015; Casadebaig et al. 2016b), while little

 
 
 
 
 
 
20 Page 14 of 20

Agron. Sustain. Dev. (2019) 39: 20

insight exists on which parameters are particularly important
for crop mixtures. A lot of work is now necessary in order to
be able to identify the most relevant parameters for crop mix-
tures, including those linked to trait plasticity.

The complementarity between crop models and IBMs pro-
motes stronger connection between communities of modelers
and is a promising way to promote the use of annual crop
mixtures in modern agriculture. Similarly, current simulation
platforms are sufficiently developed to connect models. Some
platforms, such as RECORD (Bergez et al. 2013) and APSIM
(Holzworth et al. 2014), focus specifically on crop models
(creating, connecting, simulating, and sharing them) and the
cropping system scale. Other platforms, such as OpenAlea
(Pradal et al. 2015) and GroIMP (Hemmerling et al. 2008),
are designed for IBMs. These platforms facilitate connection
and coupling of models, using shared objects to represent
plant topology (Godin and Caraglio 1998; Balduzzi et al.
2017) and geometry at multiple scales (Pradal et al. 2009;
Balduzzi et al. 2017). Recent developments in platform inter-
operability enable processes and architectural models to be
shared between platforms (Long et al. 2018); however, this
work is ongoing for crop model and IBM platforms. Some
platforms (OpenAlea, CAPSIS) include models that focus
on multi-species communities, such as forests or grasslands,
and could provide insights to improve models of annual crop
mixtures.

Modeling also requires access to multiple datasets, which
promotes sharing of public data (Reichman et al. 2011) and
using homogenized data at the local scale to generate common
databases of agronomic and environmental data. These needs
are not completely met by ecological databases such as TRY
(Kattge et al. 2011), which are developed mainly for natural
ecosystems and species. These perspectives could be viewed
as good practice for model use and sharing (Wilson et al.
2017).

Finally, modeling of annual crop mixtures was discussed in
this review at the field scale, focusing mainly on yield and
crop mixture functioning; however, agriculture is more and
more required to be multi-functional as a way of agroecology
(Gaba et al. 2018). For this reason, future models will have to
simulate impacts of annual crop mixtures on various ecosys-
tem services and the field scale should be included in more
integrated scales such as the rotation and the agricultural land-
scape, including long-term effects.

Acknowledgements The authors acknowledge support from European
Union through the project H2020 ReMIX (Redesigning European
cropping systems based on species mixtures, https://www.remix-
intercrops.eu/) and from INRA Environment and Agronomy Division
through the project IDEA (Intra- and interspecific diversity mixture in
agriculture). We also thank Michael and Michelle Corson for their helpful
comments and English revision and the two anonymous reviewers for
their valuable comments.

Compliance with ethical standards

Conflict of interest The authors declare that they have no conflict of
interest.

Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdic-
tional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

References

Affholder F, Tittonell P, Corbeels M et al (2012) Ad hoc modeling in
agronomy: what have we learned in the last 15 years? Agron J 104:
735. https://doi.org/10.2134/agronj2011.0376

Altieri MA, Nicholls CI, Henao A, Lana MA (2015) Agroecology and the
design of climate change-resilient farming systems. Agron Sustain
Dev 35:869–890. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13593-015-0285-2
Arim OJ, Waceke JW, Waudo SW, Kimenju JW (2006) Effects of
Canavalia ensiformis and Mucuna pruriens intercrops on
Pratylenchus zeae damage and yield of maize in subsistence agri-
culture. Plant Soil 284:243–251. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11104-
006-0053-9

Ashton IW, Miller AE, Bowman WD, Suding KN (2010) Niche comple-
mentarity due to plasticity in resource use: plant partitioning of
chemical N forms. Ecology 91:3252–3260. https://doi.org/10.
1890/09-1849.1

Baccar R, Fournier C, Dornbusch T, Andrieu B, Gouache D, Robert C
(2011) Modelling the effect of wheat canopy architecture as affected
by sowing density on Septoria tritici epidemics using a coupled
epidemic-virtual plant model. Ann Bot 108:1179–1194. https://doi.
org/10.1093/aob/mcr126

Balduzzi M, Binder BM, Bucksch A et al (2017) Reshaping plant biolo-
gy: qualitative and quantitative descriptors for plant morphology.
Front Plant Sci 8:177

Bargaz A, Noyce GL, Fulthorpe R, Carlsson G, Furze JR, Jensen ES,
Dhiba D, Isaac ME (2017) Species interactions enhance root alloca-
tion, microbial diversity and P acquisition in intercropped wheat and
soybean under P deficiency. Appl Soil Ecol 120:179–188. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.apsoil.2017.08.011

Barillot R (2012) Modélisation du partage de la lumière dans l’association
blé—pois (Triticum aestivum L. - Pisum sativum L.). Une approche
de type plante virtuelle. Université Nantes Angers Le Mans
Barillot R, Chambon C, Andrieu B (2016) CN-wheat, a functional-
structural model of carbon and nitrogen metabolism in wheat culms
after anthesis. I. Model description. Ann Bot 118:997–1013. https://
doi.org/10.1093/aob/mcw143

Barillot R, Chambon C, Fournier C, Combes D, Pradal C, Andrieu B
(2018) Investigation of complex canopies with a functional–
structural plant model as exemplified by leaf inclination effect on
the functioning of pure and mixed stands of wheat during grain
filling. Ann Bot. https://doi.org/10.1093/aob/mcy208

Barillot R, Combes D, Pineau S et al (2014a) Comparison of the mor-
phogenesis of three genotypes of pea (Pisum sativum) grown in pure
stands and wheat-based intercrops. Aob Plants 6:plu006. https://doi.
org/10.1093/aobpla/plu006

Barillot R, Escobar-Gutiérrez AJ, Fournier C, Huynh P, Combes D
(2014b) Assessing the effects of architectural variations on light
partitioning within virtual wheat-pea mixtures. Ann Bot 114:725–
737. https://doi.org/10.1093/aob/mcu099

Barillot R, Louarn G, Escobar-Gutiérrez AJ, Huynh P, Combes D (2011)
How good is the turbid medium-based approach for accounting for
light partitioning in contrasted grass–legume intercropping systems?
Ann Bot 108:1013–1024. https://doi.org/10.1093/aob/mcr199

Agron. Sustain. Dev. (2019) 39: 20

Page 15 of 20 20

Barot S, Allard V, Cantarel A, Enjalbert J, Gauffreteau A, Goldringer I,
Lata JC, le Roux X, Niboyet A, Porcher E (2017) Designing mix-
tures of varieties for multifunctional agriculture with the help of
ecology. A review. Agron Sustain Dev 37:13. https://doi.org/10.
1007/s13593-017-0418-x

Baumann DT, Bastiaans L, Goudriaan J, van Laar HH, Kropff MJ (2002)
Analysing crop yield and plant quality in an intercropping system
using an eco-physiological model for interplant competition. Agric
Syst 73:173–203. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0308-521X(01)00084-1
Baxevanos D, Tsialtas IT, Vlachostergios DΝ, Hadjigeorgiou I, Dordas
C, Lithourgidis A (2017) Cultivar competitiveness in pea-oat inter-
crops under Mediterranean conditions. Field Crop Res 214:94–103.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fcr.2017.08.024

Bedoussac L, Journet E-P, Hauggaard-Nielsen H, Naudin C, Corre-
Hellou G, Jensen ES, Prieur L, Justes E (2015) Ecological principles
underlying the increase of productivity achieved by cereal-grain
legume intercrops in organic farming. A review. Agron Sustain
Dev 35:911–935. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13593-014-0277-7
Berger U, Piou C, Schiffers K, Grimm V (2008) Competition among
plants: concepts, individual-based modelling approaches, and a pro-
posal for a future research strategy. Perspect Plant Ecol Evol Syst 9:
121–135. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ppees.2007.11.002

Bergez J-E, Chabrier P, Gary C et al (2013) An open platform to build,
evaluate and simulate integrated models of farming and agro-eco-
systems. Environ Model Softw 39:39–49. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
envsoft.2012.03.011

Bergez J-E, Colbach N, Crespo O et al (2010) Designing crop manage-
ment systems by simulation. Eur J Agron 32:3–9. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.eja.2009.06.001

Bergez J-E, Debaeke P, Deumier JM, Lacroix B, Leenhardt D, Leroy P,
Wallach D (2001) MODERATO: an object-oriented decision tool
for designing maize irrigation schedules. Ecol Model 137:43–60.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0304-3800(00)00431-2

Berntsen J, Hauggard-Nielsen H, Olesen JE, Petersen BM, Jensen ES,
Thomsen A (2004) Modelling dry matter production and resource
use in intercrops of pea and barley. Field Crop Res 88:69–83. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.fcr2003.11.012

Bertrand N, Roux S, Forey O et al (2018) Simulating plant water stress
dynamics in a wide range of bi-specific agrosystems in a region
using the BISWAT model. Eur J Agron 99:116–128. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.eja.2018.06.001

Betencourt E, Duputel M, Colomb B et al (2012) Intercropping promotes
the ability of durum wheat and chickpea to increase rhizosphere
phosphorus availability in a low P soil. Soil Biol Biochem 46:
181–190. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.soilbio.2011.11.015

Boote KJ, Jones JW, Mishoe JW, Berger RD (1983) Coupling pests to
crop growth simulators to predict yield reductions. Phytopathology
73:1581–1587. https://doi.org/10.1094/Phyto-73-1581

Boote KJ, Jones JW, White JW et al (2013) Putting mechanisms into crop
production models. Plant Cell Environ 36:1658–1672. https://doi.
org/10.1111/pce.12119

Boudreau MA (2013) Diseases in intercropping systems. In: VanAlfen
NK (ed) Annual review of phytopathology, Vol 51. pp 499–519
Boudsocq S, Niboyet A, Lata JC et al (2012) Plant preference for ammo-
nium versus nitrate: a neglected determinant of ecosystem function-
ing? Am Nat 180:60–69. https://doi.org/10.1086/665997

Brisson N, Bussiere F, Ozier-Lafontaine H et al (2004) Adaptation of the
crop model STICS to intercropping. Theoretical basis and
parameterisation. Agronomie 24:409–421. https://doi.org/10.1051/
agro:2004031

Brisson N, Gate P, Gouache D et al (2010) Why are wheat yields stag-
nating in Europe? A comprehensive data analysis for France. Field
Crop Res 119:201–212. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fcr.2010.07.012

Brisson N, Launay M, Mary B, Beaudoin N (2008) Conceptual basis,
formalisations and parameterization of the STICS crop model.
Editions Quae

Brooker RW, Bennett AE, Cong W-F, Daniell TJ, George TS, Hallett PD,
Hawes C, Iannetta PPM, Jones HG, Karley AJ, Li L, McKenzie
BM, Pakeman RJ, Paterson E, Schöb C, Shen J, Squire G, Watson
CA, Zhang C, Zhang F, Zhang J, White PJ (2015) Improving
intercropping: a synthesis of research in agronomy, plant physiology
and ecology. New Phytol 206:107–117. https://doi.org/10.1111/nph.
13132

Brooker RW, Karley AJ, Newton AC et al (2016) Facilitation and sus-
tainable agriculture: a mechanistic approach to reconciling crop pro-
duction and conservation. Funct Ecol 30:98–107. https://doi.org/10.
1111/1365-2435.12496

Bucksch A, Atta-Boateng A, Azihou AF et al (2017) Morphological plant
modeling: unleashing geometric and topological potential within the
plant sciences. Front Plant Sci 8:900. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.
2017.00900

Bucksch A, Burridge J, York LM et al (2014) Image-based high-through-
put field phenotyping of crop roots. Plant Physiol 166:470–486.
https://doi.org/10.1104/pp.114.243519

Cabrera-Bosquet L, Fournier C, Brichet N, Welcker C, Suard B, Tardieu
F (2016) High-throughput estimation of incident light, light inter-
ception and radiation-use efficiency of thousands of plants in a phe-
notyping platform. New Phytol 212:269–281. https://doi.org/10.
1111/nph.14027

Callaway RM (1995) Positive interactions among plants. Bot Rev 61:

306–349. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02912621

Callaway RM, Pennings SC, Richards CL (2003) Phenotypic plasticity
and interactions among plants. Ecology 84:1115–1128. https://
doi.org/10.1890/0012-9658(2003)084[1115:PPAIAP]2.0.CO;2
Casadebaig P, Guilioni L, Lecoeur J, Christophe A, Champolivier L,
Debaeke P (2011) SUNFLO, a model to simulate genotype-
specific performance of the sunflower crop in contrasting environ-
ments. Agric For Meteorol 151:163–178. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
agrformet.2010.09.012

Casadebaig P, Mestries E, Debaeke P (2016a) A model-based approach to
assist variety evaluation in sunflower crop. Eur J Agron 81:92–105.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eja.2016.09.001

Casadebaig P, Zheng B, Chapman S et al (2016b) Assessment of
the potential
traits across environ-
ments by combining crop modeling and global sensitivity
analysis. PLoS One 11:e0146385. https://doi.org/10.1371/
journal.pone.0146385

impacts of wheat plant

Chatelin MH, Aubry C, Poussin JC et al (2005) DeciBle, a software
package for wheat crop management simulation. Agric Syst 83:
77–99. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agsy.2004.03.003

Chave J (1999) Study of structural, successional and spatial patterns in
tropical rain forests using TROLL, a spatially explicit forest model.
Ecol Model 124:233–254. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0304-3800(99)
00171-4

Chelle M (2005) Phylloclimate or the climate perceived by individual
plant organs: what is it? How to model it? What for? New Phytol
166:781–790. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-8137.2005.01350.x
Chelle M, Andrieu B (1999) Radiative models for architectural modeling.
Agronomie 19:225–240. https://doi.org/10.1051/agro:19990304
Chelle M, Andrieu B (1998) The nested radiosity model for the distribu-
tion of light within plant canopies. Ecol Model 111:75–91. https://
doi.org/10.1016/S0304-3800(98)00100-8

Chen T-W, Cabrera-Bosquet L, Alvarez Prado S, Perez R, Artzet S,
Pradal C, Coupel-Ledru A, Fournier C, Tardieu F (2018) Genetic
and environmental dissection of biomass accumulation in multi-
genotype maize canopies. J Exp Bot. https://doi.org/10.1093/jxb/
ery309

20 Page 16 of 20

Agron. Sustain. Dev. (2019) 39: 20

Chenu K, Deihimfard R, Chapman SC (2013) Large-scale characteriza-
tion of drought pattern: a continent-wide modelling approach ap-
plied to the Australian wheatbelt spatial and temporal trends. New
Phytol 198:801–820. https://doi.org/10.1111/nph.12192

Chenu K, Porter JR, Martre P, Basso B, Chapman SC, Ewert F, Bindi M,
Asseng S (2017) Contribution of crop models to adaptation in
wheat. Trends Plant Sci 22:472–490. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
tplants.2017.02.003

Chimonyo VGP, Modi AT, Mabhaudhi T (2016) Simulating yield and
water use of a sorghum-cowpea intercrop using APSIM. Agric
Water Manag 177:317–328. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agwat.2016.
08.021

Chimonyo VGP, Modi AT, Mabhaudhi T (2015) Perspective on crop
modelling in the management of intercropping systems. Arch
Agron Soil Sci 61:1511–1529. https://doi.org/10.1080/03650340.
2015.1017816

Colbach N, Biju-Duval L, Gardarin A et al (2014a) The role of models for
multicriteria evaluation and multiobjective design of cropping sys-
tems for managing weeds. Weed Res 54:541–555. https://doi.org/
10.1111/wre.12112

Colbach N, Collard A, Guyot SHM, Mézière D, Munier-Jolain N (2014b)
Assessing innovative sowing patterns for integrated weed manage-
ment with a 3D crop:weed competition model. Eur J Agron 53:74–
89. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eja.2013.09.019

Corre-Hellou G, Brisson N, Launay M et al (2007) Effect of root depth
penetration on soil nitrogen competitive interactions and dry matter
production in pea-barley intercrops given different soil nitrogen sup-
plies. Field Crop Res 103:76–85. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fcr.2007.
04.008

Corre-Hellou G, Faure M, Launay M et al (2009) Adaptation of the
STICS intercrop model to simulate crop growth and N accumulation
in pea-barley intercrops. Field Crop Res 113:72–81. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.fcr.2009.04.007

Costanzo A, Bàrberi P (2014) Functional agrobiodiversity and
agroecosystem services in sustainable wheat production. A review.
Agron Sustain Dev 34:327–348. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13593-
013-0178-1

Craufurd PQ, Vadez V, Jagadish SVK et al (2013) Crop science experi-
ments designed to inform crop modeling. Agric For Meteorol 170:
8–18. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agrformet.2011.09.003

Creissen HE, Jorgensen TH, Brown JKM (2016) Increased yield stability
of field-grown winter barley (Hordeum vulgare L.) varietal mixtures
through ecological processes. Crop Prot 85:1–8. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.cropro.2016.03.001

DeJong TM, Da Silva D, Vos J, Escobar-Gutiérrez AJ (2011) Using
functional-structural plant models to study, understand and integrate
plant development and ecophysiology. Ann Bot 108:987–989.
https://doi.org/10.1093/aob/mcr257

Dong N, Tang M-M, Zhang W-P et al (2018) Temporal differentiation of
crop growth as one of the drivers of intercropping yield advantage.
Sci Rep 8:3110. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-21414-w
Dornbusch T, Baccar R, Watt J et al (2011) Plasticity of winter wheat
modulated by sowing date, plant population density and nitrogen
fertilisation: dimensions and size of leaf blades, sheaths and inter-
nodes in relation to their position on a stem. Field Crop Res 121:
116–124. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fcr.2010.12.004

Duchene O, Vian J-F, Celette F (2017) Intercropping with legume for
agroecological cropping systems: complementarity and facilitation
processes and the importance of soil microorganisms. A review.
Agric Ecosyst Environ 240:148–161. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
agee.2017.02.019

Dunbabin VM, Postma JA, Schnepf A et al (2013) Modelling root-soil
interactions using three-dimensional models of root growth, archi-
tecture and function. Plant Soil 372:93–124. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11104-013-1769-y

Durand J-L, Andrieu B, Barillot R, et al (2016) Designing and improving
mixed grasslands: advances made in modelling forage variety per-
formance. Fourrages 21–28

Duru M, Therond O, Fares M (2015) Designing agroecological transi-
tions; a review. Agron Sustain Dev 35:1237–1257. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s13593-015-0318-x

Ehrmann J, Ritz K (2014) Plant: soil interactions in temperate multi-
cropping production systems. Plant Soil 376:1–29. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s11104-013-1921-8

Escobar-Gutiérrez AJ, Combes D, Rakocevic M, de Berranger C,
Eprinchard-Ciesla A, Sinoquet H, Varlet-Grancher C (2009)
Functional relationships to estimate Morphogenetically Active
Radiation (MAR) from PAR and solar broadband irradiance mea-
surements: the case of a sorghum crop. Agric For Meteorol 149:
1244–1253. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agrformet.2009.02.011
Essah SYE, Stoskopf NC (2002) Mixture performance of phenotypically
contrasting barley cultivars. Can J Plant Sci 82:1–6. https://doi.org/
10.4141/P01-043

Evans MR, Grimm V, Johst K, Knuuttila T, de Langhe R, Lessells CM,
Merz M, O’Malley MA, Orzack SH, Weisberg M, Wilkinson DJ,
Wolkenhauer O, Benton TG (2013) Do simple models lead to gen-
erality in ecology? Trends Ecol Evol 28:578–583. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.tree.2013.05.022

Evers JB, Bastiaans L (2016) Quantifying the effect of crop spatial ar-
rangement on weed suppression using functional-structural plant
modelling. J Plant Res 129:339–351. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10265-016-0807-2

Evers JB, Letort V, Renton M, Kang M (2018a) Computational botany:
advancing plant science through functional–structural plant model-
ling. Ann Bot 121:767–772. https://doi.org/10.1093/aob/mcy050
Evers JB, van der Werf W, Stomph TJ, et al (2018b) Understanding and
optimizing species mixtures using functional-structural plant model-
ling. J Exp Bot doi: https://doi.org/10.1093/jxb/ery288

Evers JB, Vos J, Andrieu B, Struik PC (2006) Cessation of tillering in
spring wheat in relation to light interception and red: far-red ratio.
Ann Bot 97:649–658. https://doi.org/10.1093/aob/mc1020

Faverjon L, Escobar-Gutiérrez A, Litrico I, Julier B, Louarn G (2018) A
generic individual-based model can predict yield, nitrogen content,
and species abundance in experimental grassland communities. J
Exp Bot. https://doi.org/10.1093/jxb/ery323

Fayaud B, Coste F, Corre-Hellou G, Gardarin A, Dürr C (2014)
Modelling early growth under different sowing conditions: a tool
to predict variations in intercrop early stages. Eur J Agron 52:180–
190. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eja.2013.09.009

Finckh MR, Gacek ES, Goyeau H et al (2000) Cereal variety and species
mixtures in practice, with emphasis on disease resistance.
Agronomie 20:813–837

Fletcher AL, Kirkegaard JA, Peoples MB, Robertson MJ, Whish J, Swan
AD (2016) Prospects to utilise intercrops and crop variety mixtures
in mechanised, rain-fed, temperate cropping systems. Crop Pasture
Sci 67:1252. https://doi.org/10.1071/CP16211

Fletcher A, McNee M, Ogden G, Robertson M (2015) The residual N
benefits of temporary intercropping field pea with wheat. In: Acuña
T, Moeller C, Parsons D, Harrison M (eds) Building productive,
diverse and sustainable landscapes. Harrison. Proceedings of the
17th Australian Agronomy Conference. Hobart, Tas, pp 987–990
Fourcaud T, Zhang X, Stokes A et al (2008) Plant growth modelling and
applications: the increasing importance of plant architecture in
growth models. Ann Bot 101:1053–1063. https://doi.org/10.1093/
aob/mcn050

Fournier C, Andrieu B, Ljutovac S, Saint-Jean S (2003) ADEL-wheat: a
3D architectural model of wheat development. In: Hu BG, Jaeger M
(eds). Beijing, pp 54–63

Gaba S, Alignier A, Aviron S, et al (2018) Ecology for sustainable and
multifunctional agriculture. In: Gaba S, Smith B, Lichtfouse E (eds)
Sustainable agriculture reviews 28: ecology for agriculture. pp 1–46

Agron. Sustain. Dev. (2019) 39: 20

Page 17 of 20 20

Gaba S, Lescourret F, Boudsocq S, Enjalbert J, Hinsinger P, Journet EP,
Navas ML, Wery J, Louarn G, Malézieux E, Pelzer E, Prudent M,
Ozier-Lafontaine H (2015) Multiple cropping systems as drivers for
providing multiple ecosystem services: from concepts to design.
Agron Sustain Dev 35:607–623. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13593-
014-0272-z

Gao Y, Duan A, Qiu X et al (2010) Distribution of roots and root length
density in a maize/soybean strip intercropping system. Agric Water
Manag 98:199–212. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agwat.2010.08.021
Garcia-Barrios L, Mayer-Foulkes D, Franco M et al (2001) Development
and validation of a spatially explicit individual-based mixed crop
growth model. Bull Math Biol 63:507–526. https://doi.org/10.
1006/bulm.2000.0226

Gérard F, Blitz-Frayret C, Hinsinger P, Pagès L (2017) Modelling the
interactions between root system architecture, root functions and
reactive transport processes in soil. Plant Soil 413:161–180.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11104-016-3092-x

Gérard F, Gatz-Miller H, Bea S, et al (2018) Coupling reactive transport
processes with root system architecture and functions: principles and
application examples. In: Terrestrial systems research: monitoring,
prediction & high performance computing. Bonn, Germany
Gérard F, Mayer KU, Hodson MJ, Ranger J (2008) Modelling the bio-
geochemical cycle of silicon in soils: application to a temperate
forest ecosystem. Geochim Cosmochim Acta 72:741–758. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.gca.2007.11.010

Gigot C, de Vallavieille-Pope C, Huber L, Saint-Jean S (2014) Using
virtual 3-D plant architecture to assess fungal pathogen splash dis-
persal in heterogeneous canopies: a case study with cultivar mix-
tures and a non-specialized disease causal agent. Ann Bot 114:863–
875. https://doi.org/10.1093/aob/mcu098

Gliessman SR (2014) Agroecology: the ecology of sustainable food sys-

tems, 3rd edn. CRC Press Inc, Boca Raton

Godin C (2000) Representing and encoding plant architecture: a review.

Ann For Sci 57:413–438

Godin C, Caraglio Y (1998) A multiscale model of plant topological
structures. J Theor Biol 191:1–46. https://doi.org/10.1006/jtbi.
1997.0561

Goldberg DE (1990) Components of resource competition in plant com-
munities. In: Grace JB, Tilman D (eds) Perspectives on plant com-
petition. pp 27–49

Gonkhamdee S, Pierret A, Maeght J-L et al (2010) Effects of corn (Zea
mays L.) on the local and overall root development of young rubber
tree (Hevea brasiliensis Muel. Arg). Plant Soil 334:335–351. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s11104-010-0386-2

Gou F, van Ittersum MK, Simon E, Leffelaar PA, van der Putten PEL,
Zhang L, van der Werf W (2017a) Intercropping wheat and maize
increases total radiation interception and wheat RUE but lowers
maize RUE. Eur J Agron 84:125–139. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
eja.2016.10.014

Gou F, van Ittersum MK, van der Werf W (2017b) Simulating potential
growth in a relay-strip intercropping system: model description, cal-
ibration and testing. Field Crop Res 200:122–142. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.fcr.2016.09.015

Gou F, van Ittersum MK, Wang G et al (2016) Yield and yield compo-
nents of wheat and maize in wheat-maize intercropping in the
Netherlands. Eur J Agron 76:17–27. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eja.
2016.01.005

Goudriaan J (1977) Crop micrometeorology: a simulation study. Pudoc,
Center for Agricultural Publishing and Documentation, Wageningen
Grimm V, Railsback S (2005) Individual-based modeling and ecology,

Princeton University Press. Princeton; USA

Gunes A, Bagci EG, Inal A (2007) Interspecific facilitative root interac-
tions and rhizosphere effects on phosphorus and iron nutrition be-
tween mixed grown chickpea and barley. J Plant Nutr 30:1455–
1469. https://doi.org/10.1080/01904160701555648

Han G, Lang J, Sun Y et al (2016) Intercropping of rice varieties increases
the efficiency of blast control through reduced disease occurrence
and variability. J Integr Agric 15:795–802. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S2095-3119(15)61055-3

Hatt S, Boeraeve F, Artru S et al (2018) Spatial diversification of
agroecosystems to enhance biological control and other regulating
services: an agroecological perspective. Sci Total Environ 621:600–
611. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2017.11.296

Hauggaard-Nielsen H, Gooding M, Ambus P, Corre-Hellou G, Crozat Y,
Dahlmann C, Dibet A, von Fragstein P, Pristeri A, Monti M, Jensen
ES (2009) Pea-barley intercropping for efficient symbiotic N-2-fix-
ation, soil N acquisition and use of other nutrients in European
organic cropping systems. Field Crop Res 113:64–71. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.fcr.2009.04.009

Hautier Y, Seabloom EW, Borer ET, et al (2014) Eutrophication weakens
stabilizing effects of diversity in natural grasslands. Nature 508:
521-+. doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/nature13014

Hemmerling R, Kniemeyer O, Lanwert D, Kurth W, Buck-Sorlin G
(2008) The rule-based language XL and the modelling environment
GroIMP illustrated with simulated tree competition. Funct Plant
Biol 35:739–750. https://doi.org/10.1071/FP08052

Hinsinger P, Betencourt E, Bernard L et al (2011) P for two, sharing a
scarce resource: soil phosphorus acquisition in the rhizosphere of
intercropped species. Plant Physiol 156:1078–1086. https://doi.org/
10.1104/pp.111.175331

Holmgren M, Scheffer M (2010) Strong facilitation in mild environ-
ments: the stress gradient hypothesis revisited. J Ecol 98:1269–
1275. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2745.2010.01709.x

Holzworth DP, Huth NI, deVoil PG et al (2014) APSIM—evolution to-
wards a new generation of agricultural systems simulation. Environ
Model Softw 62:327–350. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsoft.2014.
07.009

Hughes AR, Stachowicz JJ (2004) Genetic diversity enhances the resis-
tance of a seagrass ecosystem to disturbance. Proc Natl Acad Sci
101:8998–9002. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0402642101

Huston M, Deangelis D, Post W (1988) New computer-models unify
ecological theory—computer-simulations show that many ecologi-
cal patterns can be explained by interactions among individual or-
ganisms. Bioscience 38:682–691. https://doi.org/10.2307/1310870
Jeuffroy M-H, Casadebaig P, Debaeke P et al (2014) Agronomic model
uses to predict cultivar performance in various environments and
cropping systems. A review. Agron Sustain Dev 34:121–137.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s13593-013-0170-9

Kattge J, Diaz S, Lavorel S et al (2011) TRY—a global database of plant
traits. Glob Chang Biol 17:2905–2935. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.
1365-2486.2011.02451.x

Keating BA, Thorburn PJ (2018) Modelling crops and cropping
systems—evolving purpose, practice and prospects. Eur J Agron.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eja.2018.04.007

Keddy P (1992) Assembly and response rules—two goals for predictive
community ecology. J Veg Sci 3:157–164. https://doi.org/10.2307/
3235676

Kiaer LP, Boesen NR (2018) Trait plasticity and G x E challenges when
breeding for mixture-ideotypes. Kassel University Press GmbH,
Witzenhausen, Germany, pp 3–6

Kiaer LP, Skovgaard IM, Ostergard H (2009) Grain yield increase in
cereal variety mixtures: a meta-analysis of field trials. Field Crop
Res 114:361–373. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fcr.2009.09.006
Knörzer H, Graeff-Hönninger S, Müller BU, Piepho HP, Claupein W
(2010) A modeling approach to simulate effects of intercropping
and interspecific competition in arable crops. Int J Inf Syst Soc
Change 1:44–65. https://doi.org/10.4018/jissc.2010100104

Knörzer H, Lawes R, Robertson M et al (2011) Evaluation and perfor-
mance of the APSIM crop growth model for German winter wheat,
maize and field pea varieties in monocropping and intercropping
systems. J Agric Sci Technol B 1:698–717

20 Page 18 of 20

Agron. Sustain. Dev. (2019) 39: 20

Kremen C, Miles A (2012) Ecosystem services in biologically diversified
versus conventional farming systems: benefits, externalities, and
trade-offs. Ecol Soc 17. https://doi.org/10.5751/ES-05035-170440
Launay M, Brisson N, Satger S et al (2009) Exploring options for man-
aging strategies for pea-barley intercropping using a modeling ap-
proach. Eur J Agron 31:85–98. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eja.2009.
04.002

Lechenet M, Dessaint F, Py G et al (2017) Reducing pesticide use while
preserving crop productivity and profitability on arable farms. Nat
Plants 3:17008. https://doi.org/10.1038/nplants.2017.8

Li L, Sun J, Zhang F et al (2001) Wheat/maize or wheat/soybean strip
intercropping: I. Yield advantage and interspecific interactions on
nutrients. Field Crop Res 71:123–137. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0378-4290(01)00156-3

Li L, Tilman D, Lambers H, Zhang F-S (2014) Plant diversity and
overyielding: insights from belowground facilitation of
intercropping in agriculture. New Phytol 203:63–69. https://doi.
org/10.1111/nph.12778

Li L, Zhang FS, Li XL, Christie P, Sun J, Yang S, Tang C (2003)
Interspecific facilitation of nutrient uptake by intercropped maize
and faba bean. Nutr Cycl Agroecosyst 65:61–71. https://doi.org/
10.1023/A:1021885032241

Lieth H (1974) Purposes of a phenology book. In: Phenology and sea-

sonality modeling. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, pp 3–19

Li-li M, Li-zhen Z, Si-ping Z et al (2015) Resource use efficiency, eco-
logical intensification and sustainability of intercropping systems. J
Integr Agric 14:1542–1550. https://doi.org/10.1016/S2095-
3119(15)61039-5

Lin BB (2011) Resilience in agriculture through crop diversification:
adaptive management for environmental change. Bioscience 61:
183–193. https://doi.org/10.1525/bio.2011.61.3.4

Lithourgidis AS, Dordas CA, Damalas CA, Vlachostergios DN (2011)
Annual intercrops: an alternative pathway for sustainable agricul-
ture. Aust J Crop Sci 5:396–410

Litrico I, Violle C (2015) Diversity in plant breeding a new conceptual
framework. Trends Plant Sci 20:604–613. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
tplants.2015.07.007

Liu B, Asseng S, Muller C, et al (2016) Similar estimates of temperature
impacts on global wheat yield by three independent methods. Nat
Clim Change 6:1130-+. doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/
NCLIMATE3115

Liu J, Ashton P (1995) Individual-based simulation-models for forest
succession and management. For Ecol Manag 73:157–175. https://
doi.org/10.1016/0378-1127(94)03490-N

Liu X, Rahman T, Yang F et al (2017) PAR interception and utilization in
different maize and soybean intercropping patterns. PLoS One 12:
e0169218. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0169218

Long Q, Kurth W, Pradal C (2018) An architecture for the integration of
different functional and structural plant models. In: IEEA. Beijing,
China, pp 107–113

Loreau M, Hector A (2001) Partitioning selection and complementarity in
biodiversity experiments. Nature 412:72–76. https://doi.org/10.
1038/35083573

Louarn G, Escobar-Gutiérrez A, Migault V, et al (2014) “Virtual grass-
land”: an individual-based model to deal with grassland community
dynamics under fluctuating water and nitrogen availability. In:
Hopkins A, Collins RP, Fraser MD, et al. (eds). Aberystwyth,
Wales, pp 242–244

Lv Y, Francis CA, Wue P et al (2014) Maize-soybean intercropping
interactions above and below ground. Crop Sci 54:914–922.
https://doi.org/10.2135/cropsci2013.06.0403

Macarthur R, Levins R (1967) The limiting similarity, convergence, and
divergence of coexisting Species. Am Nat 101:377-+. https://doi.
org/10.1086/282505

Machado S (2009) Does intercropping have a role in modern agriculture?
J Soil Water Conserv 64:55A–57A. https://doi.org/10.2489/jswc.64.
2.55A

Malézieux E, Crozat Y, Dupraz C et al (2009) Mixing plant species in
cropping systems: concepts, tools and models. A review. Agron
Sustain Dev 29:43–62. https://doi.org/10.1051/agro:2007057
Mao L, Zhang L, Li W et al (2012) Yield advantage and water saving in
maize/pea intercrop. Field Crop Res 138:11–20. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.fcr.2012.09.019

Martre P, He J, Le Gouis J, Semenov MA (2015) In silico system analysis
of physiological traits determining grain yield and protein concen-
tration for wheat as influenced by climate and crop management. J
Exp Bot 66:3581–3598. https://doi.org/10.1093/jxb/erv049
Monsi M, Saeki T (2005) On the factor light in plant communities and its
importance for matter production. Ann Bot 95:549–567. https://doi.
org/10.1093/aob/mci052

Montazeaud G, Violle C, Fréville H et al (2017) Crop mixtures: does
niche complementarity hold for belowground resources? An exper-
imental test using rice genotypic pairs. Plant Soil:1–16. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s11104-017-3496-2

Monteith J (1977) Climate and efficiency of crop production in Britain.
Philos Trans R Soc Lond Ser B-Biol Sci 281:277–294. https://doi.
org/10.1098/rstb.1977.0140

Monzon JP, Sadras VO, Abbate PA, Caviglia OP (2007) Modelling man-
agement strategies for wheat-soybean double crops in the south-
eastern Pampas. Field Crop Res 101:44–52. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.fcr.2006.09.007

Munier-Jolain N, Guyot S, Colbach N (2013) A 3D model for light
interception in heterogeneous crop:weed canopies: model structure
and evaluation. Ecol Model 250:101–110. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ecolmodel.2012.10.023

Munz S, Claupein W, Graeff-Hoenninger S (2014) Growth of bean strip-
intercropped with maize: evaluation of the CROPGRO model.
Agron J 106:2235–2247. https://doi.org/10.2134/agronj13.0579
Nicotra AB, Atkin OK, Bonser SP et al (2010) Plant phenotypic plasticity
in a changing climate. Trends Plant Sci 15:684–692. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.tplants.2010.09.008

Ning T, Zheng Y, Han H, Jiang G, Li Z (2012) Nitrogen uptake, biomass
yield and quality of intercropped spring- and summer-sown maize at
different nitrogen levels in the North China Plain. Biomass
Bioenergy 47:91–98. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biombioe.2012.09.
059

Pagès L (2011) Links between root developmental traits and foraging
performance. Plant Cell Environ 34:1749–1760. https://doi.org/10.
1111/j.1365-3040.2011.02371.x

Pagès L, Becel C, Boukcim H et al (2014) Calibration and evaluation of
ArchiSimple, a simple model of root system architecture. Ecol
Model 290:76–84. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolmodel.2013.11.014
Passioura JB (1996) Simulation models: science; snake oil, education, or
engineering? Agron J 88:690–694. https://doi.org/10.2134/
agronj1996.00021962008800050002x

Pérot T, Picard N (2012) Mixture enhances productivity in a two-species
forest: evidence from a modeling approach. Ecol Res 27:83–94.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11284-011-0873-9

Postma JA, Lynch JP (2012) Complementarity in root architecture for
nutrient uptake in ancient maize/bean and maize/bean/squash
polycultures. Ann Bot 110:521–534. https://doi.org/10.1093/aob/
mcs082

Potochnik A, McGill B (2012) The limitations of hierarchical organiza-
tion. Philos Sci 79:120–140. https://doi.org/10.1086/663237
Potting RPJ, Perry JN, Powell W (2005) Insect behavioural ecology and
other factors affecting the control efficacy of agro-ecosystem diver-
sification strategies. Ecol Model 182:199–216. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.ecolmodel.2004.07.017

Agron. Sustain. Dev. (2019) 39: 20

Page 19 of 20 20

Pradal C, Boudon F, Nouguier C et al (2009) PlantGL: a python-based
geometric library for 3D plant modelling at different scales. Graph
Model 71:1–21. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gmod.2008.10.001
Pradal C, Fournier C, Valduriez P, Cohen-Boulakia S (2015) OpenAlea:
scientific workflows combining data analysis and simulation. In:
Gupta A, Rathbun S (eds). Univ Calif San Diego, San Diego, CA
Pronk AA, Goudriaan J, Stilma E, Challa H (2003) A simple method to
estimate radiation interception by nursery stock conifers: a case
study of eastern white cedar. Njas-Wagening J Life Sci 51:279–
295. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1573-5214(03)80020-9

Purves DW, Lichstein JW, Strigul N, Pacala SW (2008) Predicting and
understanding forest dynamics using a simple tractable model.
PNAS 105:17018–17022. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.
0807754105

Railsback S, Grimm V (2012) Agent-based and individual-based
modeling—a practical introduction. Princeton University Press,
Princeton

Raseduzzaman M, Jensen ES (2017) Does intercropping enhance yield
stability in arable crop production? A meta-analysis. Eur J Agron 91:
25–33. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eja.2017.09.009

Ratnadass A, Fernandes P, Avelino J, Habib R (2012) Plant species di-
versity for sustainable management of crop pests and diseases in
agroecosystems: a review. Agron Sustain Dev 32:273–303. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s13593-011-0022-4

Raynaud X, Jaillard B, Leadley PW (2008) Plants may alter competition
by modifying nutrient bioavailability in rhizosphere: a modeling
approach. Am Nat 171:44–58. https://doi.org/10.1086/523951
Reckling M (2016) A cropping system assessment framework—
evaluating effects of introducing legumes into crop rotations. Eur J
Agron 76:186–197

Reichman OJ, Jones MB, Schildhauer MP (2011) Challenges and oppor-
tunities of open data in ecology. Science 331:703–705. https://doi.
org/10.1126/science.1197962

Renton M, Chauhan BS (2017) Modelling crop-weed competition: why,
what, how and what lies ahead? Crop Prot 95:101–108. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.cropro.2016.09.003

Reynolds M, Kropff M, Crossa J, Koo J, Kruseman G, Molero Milan A,
Rutkoski J, Schulthess U, Balwinder-Singh, Sonder K, Tonnang H,
Vadez V (2018) Role of modelling in international crop research:
overview and some case studies. Agronomy 8:291. https://doi.org/
10.3390/agronomy8120291

Robert C, Bancal MO, Nicolas P, Lannou C, Ney B (2004) Analysis and
modelling of effects of leaf rust and Septoria tritici blotch on wheat
growth. J Exp Bot 55:1079–1094. https://doi.org/10.1093/jxb/
erh108

Röhrig M, Stutzel H, Alt C (1999) A three-dimensional approach to
modeling light interception in heterogeneous canopies. Agron J
91:1024–1032

Rosenzweig C, Jones JW, Hatfield JL et al (2013) The Agricultural Model
Intercomparison and Improvement Project (AgMIP): protocols and
pilot studies. Agric For Meteorol 170:166–182. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.agrformet.2012.09.011

Rötter RP, Appiah M, Fichtler E et al (2018) Linking modelling and
experimentation to better capture crop impacts of agroclimatic
extremes—a review. Field Crop Res 221:142–156. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.fcr.2018.02.023

Seidel SJ, Palosuo T, Thorburn P, Wallach D (2018) Towards improved
calibration of crop models—where are we now and where should we
go? Eur J Agron 94:25–35. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eja.2018.01.
006

Sinclair TR, Seligman N (2000) Criteria for publishing papers on crop
modeling. Field Crop Res 68:165–172. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0378-4290(00)00105-2

Sinclair TR, Seligman NG (1996) Crop modeling: from infancy to matu-
rity. Agron J 88:698–704. https://doi.org/10.2134/agronj1996.
00021962008800050004x

Singh AK, Goyal V, Mishra AK, Parihar SS (2013) Validation of
CropSyst simulation model for direct seeded rice-wheat cropping
system. Curr Sci 104:1324–1331

Sinoquet H, Le Roux X, Adam B et al (2001) RATP: a model for simu-
lating the spatial distribution of radiation absorption, transpiration
and photosynthesis within canopies: application to an isolated tree
crown. Plant Cell Environ 24:395–406. https://doi.org/10.1046/j.
1365-3040.2001.00694.x

Sinoquet H, Moulia B, Gastal F et al (1990) Modeling the radiative
balance of the components of a well-mixed canopy—application
to a white clover-tall fescue mixture. Acta Oecologica-Int J Ecol
11:469–486

Soussana J-F, Maire V, Gross N et al (2012) Gemini: a grassland model
simulating the role of plant traits for community dynamics and eco-
system functioning. Parameterization and evaluation. Ecol Model
231:134–145. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolmodel.2012.02.002
Stoll P, Weiner J (2000) A neighborhood view of interactions among
individual plants. In: Dieckmann U, Law R, Metz JAJ (eds) The
geometry of ecological interactions: simplifying spatial complexity.
Cambridge University Press, pp 11–27

Tooker JF, Frank SD (2012) Genotypically diverse cultivar mixtures for
insect pest management and increased crop yields. J Appl Ecol 49:
974–985. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2664.2012.02173.x
Ustin SL, Gamon JA (2010) Remote sensing of plant functional types.
New Phytol 186:795–816. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-8137.
2010.03284.x

Vandermeer JH (1989) The ecology of intercropping. Cambridge

University Press, Cambridge

Vidal T, Gigot C, de Vallavieille-Pope C et al (2018) Contrasting plant
height can improve the control of rain-borne diseases in wheat cul-
tivar mixture: modelling splash dispersal in 3-D canopies. Ann Bot
121:1299–1308. https://doi.org/10.1093/aob/mcy024

Vos J, Evers JB, Buck-Sorlin GH, Andrieu B, Chelle M, de Visser PHB
(2010) Functional-structural plant modelling: a new versatile tool in
crop science. J Exp Bot 61:2101–2115. https://doi.org/10.1093/jxb/
erp345

Wang Z, Zhao X, Wu P, He J, Chen X, Gao Y, Cao X (2015) Radiation
interception and utilization by wheat/maize strip intercropping sys-
tems. Agric For Meteorol 204:58–66. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
agrformet.2015.02.004

Wezel A, Casagrande M, Celette F et al (2014) Agroecological practices
for sustainable agriculture. A review. Agron Sustain Dev 34:1–20.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s13593-013-0180-7

Wilson G, Bryan J, Cranston K et al (2017) Good enough practices in
scientific computing. PLoS Comput Biol 13:e1005510. https://doi.
org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005510

Wilson J (1988) Shoot competition and root competition. J Appl Ecol 25:

279–296. https://doi.org/10.2307/2403626

Wu L, McGechan MB, McRoberts N et al (2007) SPACSYS: integration
of a 3D root architecture component to carbon, nitrogen and water
cycling—model description. Ecol Model 200:343–359. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ecolmodel.2006.08.010

Yang F, Liao D, Wu X et al (2017) Effect of aboveground and below-
ground interactions on the intercrop yields in maize-soybean relay
intercropping systems. Field Crop Res 203:16–23. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.fcr.2016.12.007

Yu Y, Stomph T-J, Makowski D, van der Werf W (2015) Temporal niche
differentiation increases the land equivalent ratio of annual inter-
crops: a meta-analysis. Field Crop Res 184:133–144. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.fcr.2015.09.010

Zeller SL, Kalinina O, Flynn DFB, Schmid B (2012) Mixtures of genet-
ically modified wheat lines outperform monocultures. Ecol Appl 22:
1817–1826

Zhang L, Hu Z, Fan J et al (2014) A meta-analysis of the canopy light
extinction coefficient in terrestrial ecosystems. Front Earth Sci 8:
599–609

20 Page 20 of 20

Agron. Sustain. Dev. (2019) 39: 20

Zhang W-P, Liu G-C, Sun J-H, Fornara D, Zhang LZ, Zhang FF, Li L
(2017) Temporal dynamics of nutrient uptake by neighbouring plant
species: evidence from intercropping. Funct Ecol 31:469–479.
https://doi.org/10.1111/1365-2435.12732

Zhang X, Xu M, Liu J et al (2016) Greenhouse gas emissions and stocks
of soil carbon and nitrogen from a 20-year fertilised wheat-maize
intercropping system: a model approach. J Environ Manag 167:
105–114. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2015.11.014

Zhu J, van der Werf W, Anten NPR, Vos J, Evers JB (2015) The contri-
bution of phenotypic plasticity to complementary light capture in
plant mixtures. New Phytol 207:1213–1222. https://doi.org/10.
1111/nph.13416

Zhu J, van der Werf W, Vos J, Anten NPR, van der Putten PEL, Evers JB
(2016) High productivity of wheat intercropped with maize is asso-
ciated with plant architectural responses. Ann Appl Biol 168:357–
372. https://doi.org/10.1111/aab.12268

