Finding the Critical MAS(S): Resources and
Representations Needed for Weaving a Web that Hosts
Linked Multi-Agent Systems
Fabien Gandon

To cite this version:

Fabien Gandon. Finding the Critical MAS(S): Resources and Representations Needed for Weaving a
Web that Hosts Linked Multi-Agent Systems. Dagstuhl Seminar 23081 : Agents on the Web, Dagstuhl
Schloss, Feb 2023, Dagstuhl, Germany. ￿hal-03989703￿

HAL Id: hal-03989703

https://inria.hal.science/hal-03989703

Submitted on 14 Feb 2023

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

Finding the Critical MAS(S): Resources and Representations Needed 
for Weaving a Web that Hosts Linked Multi-Agent Systems 

Position Statement for the Dagstuhl Seminar 23081 “Agents on the Web”, Feb 2023 

Fabien GANDON 

Inria, Université Côte d’Azur, CNRS, I3S 

Abstract: Linked Multi-Agent Systems (MAS) is a vision where MAS are linked through their resources 
and representations, supporting knowledge augmentation for human and software agents on the Web 
and the linking and interoperability of different MAS. The goal of Linked MAS should not be to have one 
MAS platform or one MAS system on the Web but to allow us to turn the Web into an architecture 
supporting a network of interoperable MAS. The different statements submitted by participants of this 
Dagstuhl-Seminar 23081 show the variety of challenges to face and in this short position statement I 
will add a few ones to the list: the need for a viral first use case, the metadata specifically needed for 
hMAS, the need to think the insertion of hMAS in the initiatives for (re)decentralizing the Web and the 
need to make hMAS a usable extension of the Web. 

A  small  but  viral  first  hMAS.  I  concluded  my  statement  for  the  Dagstuhl  Seminar  21072  in  2021  by 
reminding that one of the hardest tasks for Tim Berners-Lee in the early 90s was to make people imagine 
a world with a fully deploy Web and that we have the same cold-start problem with the Agents on the 
Web  [A].  I  still  believe  this  to  be  a  strategic  question  for  the  Dagstuhl  Seminar  23081  in  2023.  In 
Hypermedia Multi-Agent Systems (hMAS), agents operate on an homogeneous hypermedia fabric that 
interconnects heterogeneous resources. The Web is the distributed hypermedia that has become the 
primary software architecture for applications on the Internet but not for Multi-Agent Systems, at least 
not yet. We are getting closer but we are not there and, in my opinion, a key step is to identify at least 
one use case that, not only could demonstrate hMAS but, more importantly, that has the potential to 
reach  a  critical  mass  of  usage,  the  tipping  point  of  a  network  effect  like  it  was  the  case  in  the  past 
successes of the Web [B]. Therefore, together with a proposal of a standard architecture, we need to 
find incentives and added values for hMAS to be taken on by industry and developers. In my opinion, a 
catalogue of promising applications has less potential than a small but viral first application. 

The right metadata soil for growing hMAS. A lot of effort has been invested in knowledge acquisition and 
knowledge publication. We participated to that effort, with methods to index (IndeGx) [M], visualize 
(Kartographi) and annotate (Metadatamatic) linked data(sets)[N]. But for a first viral hMAS to happen 
we  need  the  right  breeding  ground,  we  need  to  target  metadata  that  have  an  impact  on  targeted 
adopters, largest users’ community, etc. Moreover, with native mechanisms such as conneg (content 
negotiation over HTTP) the Web can do much more and support adaptative knowledge exchange of 
customized  representations  for  human  and  software  agents.  The  Web  has  the  potential  to  support 
profile-based knowledge negotiation for AI methods. The definition of artificial intelligent agent profiles 
would allow them to rely on the negotiation mechanism of the Web to obtain or contribute the type of 
knowledge  they  can  process.  Such  an  open  negotiation  could  also  be  a  key  enabler  for  forward 
compatibility in open hMAS. 

 
 
 
 
The position of hMAS in the effort of (re)decentralization. As I already wrote somewhere else [AA], even 
more than AI, it is distributed AI that has a rendezvous with the Web. By nature, the distributed artificial 
intelligence  paradigm  of  MAS  can  participate  to  the  (re-)decentralization  of  applications  and  their 
architectures in general, and on the Web in particular with hMAS. This requires positioning hMAS w.r.t. 
other initiatives like SOLID: while the notion of hMAS is being studied now, the prospect of a SOLID-
hMAS should be part of these reflections. This also raises a chicken and eggs problem: do we need a 
course-correction to occur for the Web to be (re-)decentralized again before envisaging agents on the 
Web or should we work on hMAS systems to provide a course to (re-)decentralize the Web? Moreover, 
when  we  chase  centralisation  out  the  door  it  often  comes  back  in  through  the  window:  we  may 
decentralize the architecture, but witness the applications recentralize usage; we may decentralize the 
applications  but  witness  they  build  data  siloes;  we  may  decentralize  the  data  but  witness  imposed 
schemata creating a centralized conceptualization, etc. A decentralized Web, in general, has to work on 
all these fronts at the same time and hMAS, in particular, will have to consider all of them too. 

Extend and make easier the existing solutions. To conclude I want first to insist on the fact that hMAS 
must be conceived as an extension of the Web and not as another Web or as a Web apart. The futures 
of the Web must be suited both for “software- and human-agents” [O] and it may reopen the discussion 
on the relation between humans and agents in MAS both conceptually and practically i.e. positioning 
software- and human-  agents not  only from an architectural  or  conceptual point of view  but also in 
terms of interaction design or delegation for instance. This may also echo discussions on other current 
trends in computer science such as the topic of digital twins (for artefacts, for users, etc.). Finally, while 
I concur with many of the challenges and open questions identified in the other position papers of this 
workshop I would like to conclude on a “meta-risk”. In the history of computer science, we have many 
examples  of  a  language,  an  architecture  or  a  tool  been  reinvented  because  the  previous  ones  had 
become too complex for newcomers, for simple use cases, etc. In what we will propose we must thrive 
to avoid the Déjà Vu of a technology stack that becomes too complex with an adoption cost too high 
and making the bed for the temptation to create something initially seemingly simpler on the side but 
that  will  end  up  being  the  first  layer  of  a  new  technology  stack  continuing  the  cycle  of  reinventing 
languages, architectures, formats, etc. again and again. 

References. 

[A] Fabien Gandon. Merry hMAS and Happy New Web: A Wish for Standardizing an AI-Friendly Web Architecture for 

Hypermedia Multi-Agent Systems. Dagstuhl-Seminar 21072 : Autonomous Agents on the Web, Dagstuhl Schloss, Feb 
2021, Dagstuhl, Germany. pp.3. https://hal.inria.fr/hal-03960471  

[B] Fabien Gandon, Wendy Hall. A Never-Ending Project for Humanity Called "the Web". WWW 2022 - ACM Web Conference, 

Apr 2022, Lyon, France. https://hal.inria.fr/hal-03633526   

[AA] Fabien Gandon. Distributed Artificial Intelligence and Knowledge Management: Ontologies And Multi-Agent Systems For 
A Corporate Semantic Web. PhD Thesis, INRIA, Université Nice Sophia Antipolis, November 2002. https://tel.archives-
ouvertes.fr/tel-00378201  

[M] Pierre Maillot, Olivier Corby, Catherine Faron, Fabien Gandon, Franck Michel. IndeGx: A Model and a Framework for 

Indexing RDF Knowledge Graphs with SPARQL-based Test Suits. Journal of Web Semantics, 2023, https://hal.inria.fr/hal-
03946680  

[N] Pierre Maillot, Olivier Corby, Catherine Faron, Fabien Gandon, Franck Michel. KartoGraphI: Drawing a Map of Linked Data. 

ESWC 2022 - 19th European Semantic Web Conferences, May 2022, Hersonissos, Greece. Springer. 
https://hal.inria.fr/hal-03652865 

[O] Bettina Berendt, Fabien Gandon, Susan Halford, Wendy Hall, Jim Hendler, Katharina E Kinder-Kurlanda, Eirini Ntoutsi, 

Steffen Staab. Web Futures: Inclusive, Intelligent, Sustainable The 2020 Manifesto for Web Science. Dagstuhl Manifestos, 
2021. https://hal.inria.fr/hal-03189474  

 
 
 
