Statistical Claim Checking: StatCheck in Action
Oana Balalau, Simon Ebel, Théo Galizzi, Ioana Manolescu, Quentin

Massonnat

To cite this version:

Oana Balalau, Simon Ebel, Théo Galizzi, Ioana Manolescu, Quentin Massonnat. Statistical Claim
Checking: StatCheck in Action. BDA 2022 - 38ème Conférence sur la Gestion de Données – Principes,
Technologies et Applications (BDA 2022), Oct 2022, Clermont - Ferrand, France. ￿hal-03932371￿

HAL Id: hal-03932371

https://hal.science/hal-03932371

Submitted on 10 Jan 2023

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

Statistical Claim Checking: StatCheck in Action
Oana Balalau, Simon Ebel, Théo Galizzi, Ioana Manolescu, Quentin

Massonnat

To cite this version:

Oana Balalau, Simon Ebel, Théo Galizzi, Ioana Manolescu, Quentin Massonnat. Statistical Claim
Checking: StatCheck in Action. BDA 2022 - 28st Conference on Database, Oct 2022, Clermont -
Ferrand, France. ￿hal-03932371￿

HAL Id: hal-03932371

https://hal.science/hal-03932371

Submitted on 10 Jan 2023

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

Statistical Claim Checking: StatCheck in Action

Oana Balalau, Simon Ebel, Théo Galizzi, Ioana Manolescu, Quentin Massonnat
firstname.lastname@inria.fr
Inria and Institut Polytechnique de Paris
Palaiseau, France

ABSTRACT
Fact-checking is a staple of journalists’ work. As more and more
important data is available in electronic format, computational fact-
checking, leveraging digital data sources, has been gaining interest
from the journalists as well as the computer science community.
A particular class of interesting data sources are statistics, that is,
numerical data compiled mostly by governments, administrations,
and international organizations.

We propose to demonstrate StatCheck, a fact-checking system
specialized in the French media arena. StatCheck builds upon a
prior pipeline [CMT17, CMT18, DCMT19] for fact-checking statis-
tical claims against the INSEE national statistic institute’s data and
reports. In collaboration with factchecking journalists from France
Info (Radio France), we have revisited and improved this pipelined,
and enlarged its database by an order of magnitude by adding all Eu-
rostat statistics. StatCheck also includes two novel statistic claim
extraction modules, generalizing and improving over [DCMT19].
Based on the journalists’ feedback, we built a new user interface,
suiting better their needs. We will showcase StatCheck on a vari-
ety of scenarios, where statistical claims made in social media are
checked against our statistic data.

1 INTRODUCTION
Professional journalism work has always involved verifying in-
formation with the help of trusted sources. In recent years, the
proliferation of media in which public figures make statements,
including traditional media available online, as well as social media,
has lead to an explosion in the amount of content that may need
to be verified in order to distinguish accurate from inaccurate, and
even potentially dangerous, information.

Computational fact-checking is a growing and multidisciplinary
field [CLL+18, NCH+21] which has lead to the creation of meeting
venues such as the Conference for Truth and Trust Online1. The
main tasks of a fact-checking system are: identifying the claims
made in an input document, finding the relevant evidence from
a reference dataset, and optionally producing an automated ver-
dict or if not, letting an end user decide on the truthfulness of
the claim. Recent systems proposed in this area include [HZA+17,
KSPT20, PMYW18]. In a recent survey [SP21], the authors compare
the performance of four statistical fact-checking systems [CWC+20,
HNM+20, JTY+19, KSPT20]. A statistical claim is defined as any
textual claim that can be verified over a trustworthy database by per-
forming a mathematical expression on the database cell value [SP21].
The four systems take in input a claim and a table, and should
output the truth value of the claim.

1https://truthandtrustonline.com/

BDA ’22, October 24–27, 2022, Clermont-Ferrand, France
2018. ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-XXXX-X/18/06. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX

We propose to demonstrate StatCheck, a fact-checking system
specialized in the French media arena. Differently from the above-
mentioned systems, StatCheck also includes a claim detection
step, while assuming that an end user will decide if a claim is true
or not based on the evidence retrieved. Another specificity is our
focus on checking statistical claims, with the help of large public
statistic databases (specifically, INSEE and Eurostat); the nature
and organization of these databases raises specific challenges when
searching for the statistic most appropriate to check a given claim.

Architecture and outline The overall architecture of our platform
is presented in Figure 1, based on which we present the outline of
this paper. We first acquire statistic data from reference sources,
currently INSEE and Eurostat; we describe how data is stored in Sec-
tion 2. In Section 3, we show how users’s keyword search queries
can be answered against the stored data. To help journalists even
more in their work to fact-check claims made in the public space,
also ingest them in our system (by subscribing to media sources,
or allowing users to upload their own content), and apply Natural
Language Processing to identify, from their textual content, statis-
tical claims. This is described in Section 4. We then describe the
proposed demonstration scenarios (Section 5).

2 STATISTIC DATA ACQUISITION AND

STORAGE

INSEE publishes each statistic report as an HTML page that links
to statistic tables, which may be in Excel (the most frequent case)
or in HTML. The tables are not relational. On one hand, they have
human-understandable header cells not only for each column (as
is the case for a relational table), but also for each line. From this
perspective, a statistic file resembles more a multidimensional ag-
gregate query result. On the other hand, many tables feature hier-
archical (nested) headers: for instance, a header cell corresponding
to "Paris (75)" may appear as a child of another header cell corre-
sponding to "Île-de-France". To capture such structure, the data is
modeled as an RDF graph, as illustrated in Figure 2; each cell be-
comes an RDF URI, connected to its closest line header (blue arrows),
and closest column header (red arrows). The black arrows are triples
relating column header cells to their parent header cell.

While revisiting the platform, we re-crawled the INSEE Web
site up to May 2022, leading to 60,002 Excel files and 58,849 HTML
files. We then extract statistic tables from those files and convert
them into RDF graphs, accounting for 7,362,538,629 RDF triples,
including 22,366,376 row or column header cells. To store this large
amount of data, we use JENA TDB22; loading the complete set
of INSEE published statistics took around 29 hours. Subsequently,
we incrementally re-crawl the Web site each night to retrieve and
ingest the possible studies published every day.

2https://jena.apache.org/documentation/tdb2/

BDA ’22, October 24–27, 2022, Clermont-Ferrand, France

Balalau et al.

Figure 1: Statistical fact-checking architecture overview.

Figure 2: RDF graph modeling of INSEE table data [CMT17].

As part of our collaboration with RadioFrance, we recently added
(𝑖) 6,803
a new corpus of reference statistics, namely Eurostat:
data tables; these are two-dimensional tables with line headers,
row headers, and no nesting in the headers. Each header is a con-
catenation of a set of dimension values, e.g., EU15_NO as a line
header corresponds to the value of metric "Union européenne - 15
pays (1995-2004) et Norvège" (𝑖𝑖) 580 dictionaries that map 243,083
statistical concepts codes, such as BLA in the above, into natural-
language descriptions. The data files range from 2 lines, to 37 million
lines (this largest file holds information about farmers and their
agricultural properties across Europe). Together, the Eurostat data
files total 414.908.786 lines. As the tables of Eurostat are normal-
ized and flat, they do not require a semi-structured (graph) storage
format. Due to their relatively high number, instead of storing them
in a relational database, we keep them as plain files, and developed
specialized search techniques for them, as we explain below.

3 STATISTIC SEARCH
Given a keyword query 𝑄 = {𝑘1, 𝑘2, . . . , 𝑘𝑛 }, our purpose is to
return a ranked list of the most pertinent datasets w.r.t the query.
Further, if in a dataset we can identify a row, column, or a cell that
seems to answer exactly the query, we return that result at the
finest level of granularity.

It is important to note that query results are virtually always
numbers, because this is what statistic institutes publish. Such num-
bers can only be interpreted through the metadata (elements of
natural language) associated to them. We use L = {𝑇 , 𝐶𝐻, 𝑅𝐻, 𝐶}
to denote the set of possible locations in which a term can appear
in the metadata of a table, respectively: the dataset title, a column
header, a row header, or a comment. The locations are important:
(𝑖) since a term appearing in a title is more important than one
appearing in a header (Section 3.1); (𝑖𝑖) to determine whether a
given dataset matches some terms in a row header and others in
a column header - in which case the cell at the intersection of the
row with the column likely has a very pertinent result (Section 3.2).

3.1 Dataset Indexing and Search
For each dataset 𝑑, we call metadata of 𝑑 its title together with
any comment published by INSEE next to the dataset. Further, the
statistic tables within 𝑑 have row headers and column headers which
may be INSEE internal codes, not directly readable by non-experts.
In such cases, 𝑑 also includes (in a separate sheet) the natural-
language descriptions of the dimensions involved in all these headers.
These are also part the dataset’s metadata.

We split the metadata of 𝑑 into a set of tokens 𝑇 = {𝑡1, . . . , 𝑡𝑁 }.
For each token 𝑡, we identify, based on a Word2Vec model3, the 50
tokens 𝑡 ′ closest semantically to 𝑡. Next, for each appearance of a
token 𝑡 in a location 𝑙 within 𝑑, our term-location index 𝐼𝑇 𝐿 stores:
(𝑖) the index entry (𝑡, 𝑑, 𝑙) corresponding to the token actually found
in 𝑑; and (𝑖𝑖) 50 entries of the form (𝑡 ′, 𝑑, 𝑙, 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡), corresponding to
the 50 tokens closest to 𝑡. These extra entries enable answering
queries on terms close to (but disjoint from) the dataset content. For
instance, when 𝑡 is "Enseignement", 𝑡 ′ could be "Ecole", "Enseignant",
"Elève", etc. To determine the datasets pertinent for the query 𝑄,
we look up the query keywords in 𝐼𝑇 𝐿; a dataset containing at least
one keyword is potentially interesting.

To rank datasets, a relevance score was introduced in [CMT18],
based on word distances between the query keywords and the
datasets’ metadata, and also reflecting the locations where the key-
words were found for each dataset. To this custom score, we have
added the classic BM25 [RZ09] computed over all the datasetes’
metadata, and are currently experimenting with the two.

Improving the INSEE pipeline. We brought several improve-
3.1.1
ments over [CMT18]. First, we collected and processed metadata
during data acquisition (as opposed to retrieving it from Fuseki
after loading). Tokening and lemmatization, based on Spacy, were
sped up by accumulating all the metadata of a table in a single
string for which we call Spacy only once per dataset.

Next, we improved the understanding and interpretation of ge-
ographical query terms. Users may query for a city, department,
such as "Essonne", or region, while statistic data may be avail-
able at different levels of aggregation, e.g., a dataset may be about
"Île-de-France" (the region). The system needs to be aware of the
relationship between the two, in order to also consider returning
data about the region. To that purpose, we used a list4 containing

3We used the model frWac_non_lem_no_postag_no_phrase_200_skip_cut100.bin from
https://fauconnier.github.io
4https://www.data.gouv.fr/fr/datasets/regions-departements-villes-et-villages-de-
france-et-doutre-mer/

Statistical Claim Checking: StatCheck in Action

BDA ’22, October 24–27, 2022, Clermont-Ferrand, France

the names of all cities, departments and regions of France (35.984
names in all). To quickly identify them in user queries, we used
an implementation5 of the FlashText algorithm [Sin17], capable of
finding, in a document of size 𝑁 , one of 𝑀 fixed keywords, in 𝑂 (𝑁 )
time complexity. This is much faster than the typical 𝑂 (𝑁 𝑀) cost
of regular expression pattern matching, a sizable advantage for us.
The optimizations introduced above allow us to reduce the overall
INSEE loading and indexing from 39 hours to about 3h.

3.1.2 Eurostat indexing pipeline. As detailed in Section 2, Eurostat
datasets (𝑖) have a simpler tabular structure, (𝑖𝑖) together, are much
larger than the INSEE corpus, leading to metadata 100× larger, and
(𝑖𝑖𝑖) contain a significant number of very large files (hundreds of
millions of rows). This discourages row- or cell-level indexing of
the Eurostat metadata, as the index would be much too large.

Instead, we decide to use Eurostat statistical concept codes as a
basis for indexing, as follows. Let 𝑐 be a Eurostat concept, e.g., ED1,
appearing in dataset 𝑑 at a location 𝑙 ∈ L. We insert in a concept-
dataset index 𝐼𝐶 the entry (𝑐, 𝑑, 𝑙). For instance, if 𝑐 appears in 1
million row headers in 𝑑, only one entry with 𝑙 = 𝑅𝐻 is generated.
Next, let 𝑑𝑐 be the natural-language description that Eurostat
associates to 𝑐, e.g., "Enseignement primaire" for ED1. Let 𝑇 =
{𝑡1, 𝑡2, . . . , 𝑡𝑁 } be the tokens in 𝑑𝑐 , and for 1 ≤ 𝑖 ≤ 𝑁 , let 𝑡 𝑗
𝑖 , for
1 ≤ 𝑗 ≤ 50, be the closest tokens to 𝑡𝑖 . For each 𝑡𝑖 ∈ 𝑇 , we look up
all the (𝑐, 𝑑, 𝑙) pairs in 𝐼𝐶 , and insert in the term-dataset index 𝐼𝑇 ,
a (𝑡𝑖, 𝑑, 𝑙) entry. Next, for every 𝑡 𝑗
𝑖 similar to 𝑡𝑖 , we insert in 𝐼𝑇 an
entry (𝑡 𝑗
𝑖 , 𝑑, 𝑙, 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡, 𝑡𝑖 ), where 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡 is the distance between 𝑡𝑖 and 𝑡 𝑗
𝑖 .
𝐼𝐶 and 𝐼𝑇 are stored in Redis; 𝐼𝐶 only serves to accelerate the con-
struction of 𝐼𝑇 , which was prohibitively slow without it. Indexing
the complete Eurostat data in this way took around 4 minutes.

When a query {𝑘1, . . . , 𝑘𝑚 } is asked, we search 𝐼𝑇 for entries of
the form (𝑘𝑖, 𝑑, 𝑙) or (𝑘𝑖, 𝑑, 𝑙, 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡, 𝑘′
𝑖 ). Any dataset having an entry
for at least one 𝑘𝑖 is potentially interesting; then, we score them
either using either BM25 or the score introduced in [CMT18].

3.2 Data Cell Indexing and Search
From the 20 highest-scores datasets, we try to extract results at the
cell, row, or column level. Given the query {𝑘1, . . . , 𝑘𝑚 }, the index
𝐼𝐶𝐿 (INSEE) or 𝐼𝑇 (Eurostat) returns, for each 1 ≤ 𝑖 ≤ 𝑚, a set of
entries, each containing: a keyword 𝑘𝑖 or a close term 𝑘 𝑗
𝑖 , a dataset
𝑑, and a location 𝑙. Let 𝑑 be one of the most interesting datasets,
and 𝐼 (𝑑) be the set of all index entries for this query and 𝑑.

If 𝐼 (𝑑) only features title (𝑇 ) or comment (𝐶) locations, then 𝑑 is

pertinent as a whole, and no cell search is needed.

On the contrary, if 𝐼 (𝑑) has some entries with 𝑙 = 𝑅𝐻 , say, for
keyword 𝑘1 (or a close term 𝑘 𝑗
1), and other entries with 𝑙 = 𝐶𝐻 ,
say, for 𝑘2 (or some 𝑘 𝑗
2), then at the intersection of the row whose
header matches 𝑘1, with the column whose header marched 𝑘2, is
a cell that appears to be a very fine-granularity answer to 𝑄.

• If 𝑑 is an INSEE dataset, 𝐼 (𝑑) specifies exactly which rows
and columns are concerned. Then, the cell is identified by
asking a SPARQL query [CMT18], evaluated by Fuseki.
• On the contrary, if 𝑑 is an Eurostat dataset, 𝐼 (𝑑) only specifies
that "some row (column) headers match". Identifying the
relevant cells require more effort, as we explain below.

Identifying the right columns An Eurostat file has at most a few
dozen columns. To find the column referred to by an 𝐼 (𝑑) entry
whose key is 𝑘, we read the first (header) line of 𝑑, and identify the
column(s) whose header contains 𝑘. This step is very fast, because
we only read the beginning of the file.
Identifying the right rows This required an extra index to be
efficient even on files with millions of rows. Specifically, when
indexing the data, we also create a row location index 𝐼𝑅 which,
for every row header entry (𝑘, 𝑑, 𝑅𝐻 ) ∈ 𝐼𝑇 , stores (𝑘, 𝑑, 𝑅𝑘,𝑑 ), where
𝑅𝑘,𝑑 is the list of the indexes of data rows in 𝑑 which contain 𝑘 in
their header. For efficiency, 𝐼𝑅 is saved directly as a file on disk, and
supports direct access by 𝑘 and 𝑑, following the Adaptive Positional
Map of [ABB+15].
Cell extraction Once the right rows and column indexes are
known, we read the relevant rows from 𝑑, and carve out of them
the relevant data cell(s). With the help of a line cache library6, this
process is quite efficient.

Overall, on INSEE datasets, using Fuseki, data cell search takes
35ms up to 2.86s. On Eurostat, using 𝐼𝑅, we record 4.76𝜇s up to
2.66s. The lower bound is higher for INSEE because we have to
pass SPARQL queries across a connection to the Fuseki server.

4 CLAIM DETECTION
A claim is a statement to be validated, that is we aim to establish
if it is true of false. The validation is achieved by finding related
statements, called evidence, which back up or disprove the claim.
In our work, the claims are detected in an input text, while the
evidence is retrieved from a set of trusted sources, our reference
datasets. Our platform detects claims from text stored in .txt, .odt,
.docx or .pdf files, and from the Twitter and Facebook posts of
public figures. For posts, our platform retrieves regularly the most
recent updates of a predefined group of users.

4.1 Statistical Claim Detection
In [DCMT19], the authors introduced a statistical claim detection
method that given an input set of statistical entities (e.g. chômage,
coefficient budgétaire) and a sentence, it retrieves all the statistical
statements of the form ⟨statistical entity, numerical value and
unit, date⟩ present in the sentence. The statistical statement, if
present, represents the statistical claim to be verified. The statistical
entities and units are retrieved using exact string matching, while
the date is extracted using HeidelTime [SG10], a time expression
parser. If no date is found by the parser, the posting timestamp is
used. More context about the claim to be verified is found using a
Named Entity Recognition (NER) model, which returns organiza-
tions and locations. We note, however, that the organization and
location are optional, while a statistical statement is not complete
without one of its three elements. The initial statistical entity list is
constructed from the reference datasets by taking groups of tokens
from the headers of tabels, we refer to [DCMT19] for more details.
We improved the method presented in [DCMT19] to optimize
both speed and quality of extractions. We refer to the two methods
as OriginalStatClaim [DCMT19] and StatClaim. We first performed
a more careful match between the tokens of a sentence and our
input statistical entities. Using the syntactic tree of the sentence
and a lemmatizer, statistical entities are matched on using their

5https://github.com/vi3k6i5/flashtext

6https://docs.python.org/fr/3/library/linecache.html

BDA ’22, October 24–27, 2022, Clermont-Ferrand, France

Balalau et al.

Figure 3: Screen captures of our tool. Top: sample candidate data cells with the corresponding header row (blue) and header
column (red); bottom: tweet analysis interface.

lemma, and are extended to contain the entire nominal group of the
matched token. Numerical values are associated with units using
both lemma matching from our set of units and a syntactic analysis.
Units can be a noun following a numerical value, or a nominal
group containing one or more units. (e.g. "millions d’euros"). As in
the original approach, if we retrieve a statistical statement of the
form ⟨statistical entity, numerical value and unit, date⟩, we
have found a claim to verify. In the default setting of our algorithm,
a claim should contain all the three element. In addition, we filter
claims coming from sentences in which the verb is in the future
tense or in the first person. We have incorporated feedback from
the journalists and we allow through our interface a relaxation of
the approach: the numerical value can be missing, and the filtering
on the verbs can be removed.

4.2 Check-worthy Claim Detection
To complement the statistical claim detection model, we developed
a model that is not conditioned on a set of initial statistical enti-
ties. The model classifies a sentence as check-worthy or not, where
check-worthiness is defined as sentences containing factual claims
that the general public will be interested in learning about their ve-
racity [AHLT20]. We leveraged the ClaimBuster dataset [AHLT20],
a English dataset containing check worthy claims from the U.S.
Presidential debates, to train a cross-lingual language model, XLM-
R [CKG+19], which is able to perform zero-shot classification on
French sentences after having been trained on English data.

The ClaimBuster dataset ClaimBuster is a crowd-sourced dataset
where the sentences from the 15 U.S. presidential elections de-
bates from 1960 to 2016 have been annotated. The labels are Non-
Factual Sentences (NFS), Unimportant Factual Sentences (UFS) or
Check-Worthy Factual Sentences (CFS). The dataset contains 23𝐾
sentences, and a subset of higher quality of 11𝐾 sentences was
produced by the authors for training models on classification tasks.
In this smaller dataset, the NFS and UFS labels are grouped together
as negative labels, and the CFS labels are considered positive. We
chose this higher quality dataset to fine-tune the XLM-R model.

F1 score Accuracy
Dataset
0.934
ClaimBuster
0.856
French tweets
Table 1: Evaluation of the fine-tuned XLM-R model.

Precision Recall
0.848
0.769

0.865
0.682

0.883
0.612

Fine-tuning the XLM-R model The XLM-R model is a Transformer-
based masked language model trained on one hundred languages
with 2.5TB of Common Crawl data. It achieves state-of-the-art re-
sults on multilingual tasks such as the XNLI benchmark [CRL+18],
while remaining competitive on monolingual tasks. We used a pre-
trained model with a vocabulary size of 250𝐾, 12 hidden layers of
size 768 and 12 attention heads. To account for the unbalanced ratio
of labels, we used a weighted cross-entropy loss. The dataset was
split into train, dev and test datasets with a ratio of 80%/%10%/10%.

Evaluation To ptimize the performance, we trained the model with
different hyperparameters. The best results were obtained with a
learning rate of 5 · 10−5, a batch size of 64, and using the AdamW
optimizer. To evaluate the performance of the different models on
French data, we annotated 200 randomly sampled French tweets
and labeled them as check-worthy or not following the definition
in [AHLT20]. Two annotators labeled each tweet; in the golden
standard, a tweet is deemed check-worthy if both annotators agree
on it, and not check-worthy otherwise. The Cohen Kappa score for
inter-annotator agreement is 0.6, which is considered moderate to
substantial agreement. The results can be found in Table 1. The drop
in precision on French data could be because we are evaluating on
a small test dataset (only 200 tweets with 39 positive examples), or
the fact that the tweets’ format and vocabulary might be different
than the ones in the Presidential debate sentences used for training.

4.3 Integration and Evaluation of the Claim

Detection Models

We evaluate the claim detection models, (OriginalStatClaim [DCMT19],
StatClaim and CheckWorthyClaim), on a set of 1595 tweets. Each
tweet was labeled with two classes: "Verifiable numerical claim"
(True if the tweet contains at least one numerical and verifiable
claim") and "INSEE statistical claim" (True if the tweet contains at

Statistical Claim Checking: StatCheck in Action

BDA ’22, October 24–27, 2022, Clermont-Ferrand, France

Models
OriginalStatClaim
StatClaim
CheckWorthyClaim

Precision Recall
0.466
0.517
0.915

0.692
0.833
0.701

F1 score
0.557
0.638
0.794

Table 2: Model evaluation on verifiable numerical claims.

Models
OriginalStatClaim
StatClaim
CheckWorthyClaim

Precision Recall
0.688
0.750
0.938

0.282
0.333
0.195

F1 score
0.400
0.462
0.323

Table 3: Model evaluation on INSEE statistical claims.

least one numerical, statistical claim verifiable against the INSEE
dataset"). We chose these two labels as the first one gives us an
indication of the tweets that can be verified if we had an unlimited
access to resources, while the second class identifies the tweets
verifiable in the setting in which we have access to only one re-
source. To construct our set, we gathered 1595 random tweets from
our scraped dataset. Then, we automatically detected if a tweet
contained a numerical value, if not, the tweet was labeled as neg-
ative for both classes. After that first step, we manually labeled
the remaining 101 tweets. Two annotators labeled each tweet, and
the gold standard was chose as True if both annotators agreed. For
the class "verifiable numerical claim", we obtained a Kappa inter-
Annotator Agreement score of 0.917 (almost perfect agreement) and
59 tweets were labeled as positive. For the class "INSEE statistical
claim" we obtained an inter-annotator Agreement score of 0.807
(subtantial agreement) and 16 tweets were labeled as positive.

Evaluation procedure For StatClaim and OriginalStatClaim, a
tweet is considered positive if models return at least one extracted
statistical statement. Our StatClaim was used in its default con-
figuration: extractions with numerical values, and without verbs
conjugated in the future or at the first person. For CheckWorthy-
Claim, a tweet is considered positive if the model return a check-
worthy score > 0.9. We report the results in Table 2 and Table 3.
StatClaim performs better than the original at detecting INSEE
verifiable claims, and CheckWorthyClaim vastly outperforms both
models on the detection of numerical claims, as they are a subset
of check-worthy sentences that the model was trained to detect.

Default claim detection strategy. By default, StatCheck uses
StatClaim for statistical claim detection. However, given the good
performance of CheckWorthyClaim on numerical claims, we allow
users to switch to it, even if we might not be able to verify them
against the reference datasets.

5 DEMONSTRATION SCENARIOS
Our system is developed in Python and deployed on a Unix server.
Its GUI is accessible via a Web server; Figure 3 shows two screen
captures. Demonstration attendees will be able to:

• Ask queries in the statistic search interface, and inspect the
results, at the level of cell, line, or column, together with their
metadata from the original statistic site (INSEE or Eurostat);
• Visualize incoming social media messages (as they arrive in
real-time and are stored and analyzed by our platform), in
order to see (𝑖) the statistical mentions and (𝑖𝑖) claims deemed

potentially check-worthy, identified in these messages, as
illustrated in Figure 3. Note that the system also proposes
candidate search queries for the statistic search interface.
• Users will be able to select various options (restrict to nu-
merical claims or not, include statements about the future
or not, include first-person texts or not, etc.) and see their
impact on the claim extraction output.

• Write their own text and/or suggest other content to be

processed by our analysis pipeline (Section 4).

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Radio France, France Info, and in particular Antoine
Krempf and his Le vrai du faux team, for their valuable feedback.
This work is partially funded by AI Chair SourcesSay project (ANR-
20-CHIA-0015-01).

REFERENCES
[ABB+15] Ioannis Alagiannis, Renata Borovica-Gajic, Miguel Branco, Stratos Idreos,
and Anastasia Ailamaki. Nodb: efficient query execution on raw data files.
Commun. ACM, 58(12):112–121, 2015.

[AHLT20] Fatma Arslan, Naeemul Hassan, Chengkai Li, and Mark Tremayne. A
Benchmark Dataset of Check-worthy Factual Claims. In 14th International
AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media. AAAI, 2020.

[CKG+19] Alexis Conneau, Kartikay Khandelwal, Naman Goyal, Vishrav Chaud-
hary, Guillaume Wenzek, Francisco Guzmán, Edouard Grave, Myle Ott,
Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. Unsupervised cross-lingual
representation learning at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.02116, 2019.

[CLL+18] Sylvie Cazalens, Philippe Lamarre, Julien Leblay, Ioana Manolescu, and
Xavier Tannier. A content management perspective on fact-checking. In
WWW (Companion Volume), pages 565–574. ACM, 2018.

[CMT17] Tien Duc Cao, Ioana Manolescu, and Xavier Tannier. Extracting linked
data from statistic spreadsheets. In International Workshop on Semantic
Big Data, International Workshop on Semantic Big Data, pages 1 – 5, 2017.
[CMT18] Tien-Duc Cao, Ioana Manolescu, and Xavier Tannier. Searching for Truth

in a Database of Statistics. In WebDB, pages 1–6, 2018.

[CRL+18] Alexis Conneau, Ruty Rinott, Guillaume Lample, Adina Williams,
Samuel R. Bowman, Holger Schwenk, and Veselin Stoyanov. Xnli: Evalu-
ating cross-lingual sentence representations. In EMNLP, 2018.
[CWC+20] Wenhu Chen, Hongmin Wang, Jianshu Chen, Yunkai Zhang, Hong Wang,
Shiyang Li, Xiyou Zhou, and William Yang Wang. Tabfact : A large-scale
dataset for table-based fact verification. In ICLR, 2020.

[DCMT19] Tien Duc Cao, Ioana Manolescu, and Xavier Tannier. Extracting statistical
mentions from textual claims to provide trusted content. In NLDB, 2019.
[HNM+20] Jonathan Herzig, Pawel Krzysztof Nowak, Thomas Müller, Francesco
Piccinno, and Julian Eisenschlos. TaPas: Weakly supervised table parsing
via pre-training. In ACL, pages 4320–4333, 2020.

[HZA+17] Naeemul Hassan, Gensheng Zhang, Fatma Arslan, Josue Caraballo,
Damian Jimenez, Siddhant Gawsane, Shohedul Hasan, Minumol Joseph,
Aaditya Kulkarni, Anil Kumar Nayak, Vikas Sable, Chengkai Li, and Mark
Tremayne. Claimbuster: The first-ever end-to-end fact-checking system.
PVLDB, 10(12):1945–1948, 2017.

[JTY+19] Saehan Jo, Immanuel Trummer, Weicheng Yu, Xuezhi Wang, Cong Yu,
Daniel Liu, and Niyati Mehta. Verifying text summaries of relational data
sets. In SIGMOD, SIGMOD ’19, page 299–316, 2019.

[KSPT20] Georgios Karagiannis, Mohammed Saeed, Paolo Papotti, and Immanuel
Trummer. Scrutinizer: Fact checking statistical claims. Proc. VLDB Endow.,
13(12):2965–2968, 2020.

[NCH+21] Preslav Nakov, David Corney, Maram Hasanain, Firoj Alam, Tamer El-
sayed, Alberto Barrón-Cedeño, Paolo Papotti, Shaden Shaar, and Gio-
vanni Da San Martino. Automated fact-checking for assisting human
fact-checkers. In IJCAI, pages 4551–4558, 2021. Survey Track.

[PMYW18] Kashyap Popat, Subhabrata Mukherjee, Andrew Yates, and Gerhard
Weikum. DeClarE: Debunking fake news and false claims using evidence-
aware deep learning. In EMNLP, pages 22–32, 2018.

[RZ09] Stephen Robertson and Hugo Zaragoza. The probabilistic relevance frame-

work: BM25 and beyond. Now Publishers Inc, 2009.

[SG10] Jannik Strötgen and Michael Gertz. Heideltime: High quality rule-based
extraction and normalization of temporal expressions. In Int’l. Workshop
on Semantic Evaluation, pages 321–324, 2010.

[Sin17] Vikash Singh. Replace or retrieve keywords in documents at scale. CoRR,

abs/1711.00046, 2017.

BDA ’22, October 24–27, 2022, Clermont-Ferrand, France

Balalau et al.

[SP21] Mohammed Saeed and Paolo Papotti. Fact-checking statistical claims

with tables. IEEE Data Engineering Bulletin, 2021.

