Using polymorphic glyphs to support the visual
exploration of hierarchical spatio-temporal data
Aline Menin, Hadil Ayari, Franck Michel, Marco Winckler

To cite this version:

Aline Menin, Hadil Ayari, Franck Michel, Marco Winckler. Using polymorphic glyphs to support the
visual exploration of hierarchical spatio-temporal data. INTERACT 2023 - 19th IFIP International
Conference of Technical Committee 13 (Human- Computer Interaction), Aug 2023, York, United
Kingdom. pp.325-329, ￿10.1007/978-3-031-42293-5_31￿. ￿hal-04188896￿

HAL Id: hal-04188896

https://hal.science/hal-04188896

Submitted on 27 Aug 2023

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

Using polymorphic glyphs to support the visual
exploration of hierarchical spatio-temporal data

Aline Menin[0000−1111−2222−3333], Hadil Ayari, Franck
Michel[1111−2222−3333−4444], and Marco Winckler[2222−−3333−4444−5555]

Abstract. Studying spatio-temporal data is essential to understand the
processes of the real world. However, the design of effective visualizations
to explore spatio-temporal data is not a straightforward task due to the
inherent multidimensional aspects of the data. In this paper, we explore
the usage of polymorphous glyphs (i.e. glyphs that change shapes accord-
ing to the context) to support the exploration of multiple hierarchical
levels and dimensions of the data. We implemented our approach in the
form of a web-based visualization interface that we demonstrate through
a case study of the ISSA KG, which describes scientific publications in
the field of agriculture, thus supporting domain experts on investigating
where, when and how different crops are cultivated.

Keywords: Information visualization · Polymorphous glyphs · Linked
data visualization · Spatio-temporal visualization.

1

Introduction

The study of spatio-temporal data (i.e. data described through geographic and
temporal information) is essential to understand the processes of the real world.
The widespread use of Linked Open Data (LOD) in the form of RDF (Resource
Description Framework) knowledge graphs (KG) results on the availability and
easy access of numerous datasets describing the semantics of real-world spatio-
temporal entities and their relations on the Web, leading to huge amounts of
geo-referenced information. Nevertheless, the value of these data depends on
efficient tool support to extract relevant information to communicate the un-
derlying phenomena. The design of efficient data representations to support the
exploration of spatio-temporal data is particularly challenging. Further to being
able to represent the multiple dimensions and levels of spatial (e.g. countries,
regions, neighborhoods, etc) and temporal (e.g. years, months, days, etc.) granu-
larity, a visualization technique should reflect the inherent properties of the data
(i.e. the geographical arrangement of locations and the ordering of time units).
Multidimensional visualization is a challenge on itself: as the number data
dimensions increases, a single view displaying all the information at once is no
longer suitable due to cognitive overload and visual cluttering [5]. The coordi-
nated multiple views paradigm tackles the problem of representing multidimen-
sional data through a predefined set of views that represent different perspectives
to the data [7], while providing coordinating operations between views to sup-
port reasoning [9]. However, the plethora of existing visualization techniques [4,

2

Menin et al.

6] makes it unfeasible to determine a single combination of visualization tech-
niques capable of solving every domain-related task.

Glyph-based data representations are another popular approach to deal with
multidimensional data in information visualization due to their ability to con-
vey multiple attributes in a small and compact visual representation. These are
powerful visual representations capable of stimulating more cognitive activity
during visualization than other forms of visual design [1]. Nonetheless, they are
often static representations, displaying a large yet single perspective to the data.
In this paper, we investigate the usage of polymorphic glyphs (i.e. glyphs that
change its shape according to the surrounding semantics and/or user actions)
to assist the exploration of hierarchical spatio-temporal data. As a proof-of-
concept, we implemented our approach in the form of a web-based visualization
tool, called PHiTGlyph (Polymorphic and Hierarchic Temporal Glyph), that
uses interaction to activate the polymorphous aspect of glyphs.

Finally, we demonstrate the suitability of our approach by exploring the ISSA
KG [8], which describes over 110,000 scientific resources (i.e., book, book chap-
ter, article, thesis, etc.) in the field of agriculture. Each data record is enriched
through named-entity (NE) linking, which assigns a unique identity to entities
(e.g. locations or crop cultures) mentioned in the text. Thus, each data record
corresponds to a scientific publication described through information such as
title, authors, publication date, abstract and associated to a number of geo-
graphic and thematic NEs. Each geographic NE is described through a name
and a geographical position (i.e. latitude and longitude).

2 PHiTGlyph: Polymorphic and Hierarchic Temporal

Glyph

Similar to previous works [2, 10, 3], we geo-locate glyphs encoding attributes of
the data records. The thematic dimension of our data comprises the research
topic of each publication, which information is hierarchical, composed by cate-
gories and sub-categories. Visualization techniques such as treemap, sunburst,
circle packing and tree diagram are well-known to represent hierarchical data.
However, as the number of categories and hierarchical levels increase, the visual
legibility of these techniques reduces significantly. Although interaction supports
navigating up and down the different levels of the hierarchy, such navigation hap-
pens one category at the time, which hinders comparison tasks. For this reason,
we chose to design a polymorphous glyph, which different shapes can represent
different levels of the hierarchy, thus improving legibility and between-category
comparison. Particularly, we follow a stacked-bar graph-like design to represent
the count of data records (size of bar sectors) associated to each category (color).
When placed over a time axis, it can encode the temporal distribution of data
records, while being easy to read and supporting comparison tasks. According
to Borgo et al. [1] the chosen design respects criteria of typedness, visual order-
ability, channel capacity, separability, and learnability.

PHiTGlyph

3

Fig. 1. Overview of glyph states and interactions.

The diagram illustrated in Figure 1 represent the different states of our glyph,
which are activated through interaction: zooming with mouse scroll enables a
hierarchical browsing of the data from the total count of publications to the
distribution per sub-category, while the use of an arrow placed next to the glyph
reveal the temporal distribution of publications for a particular country, either
the total count or the distribution per category and sub-category. Upon hovering
over the glyphs, the system displays a tooltip showing detailed information about
the represented data. Finally, to assist the user on answering questions such as
“how is a crop cultivated in a particular country?”, upon identifying the country
where the crop is cultivated, the user can hover the glyph and select the category
to see what publications in the dataset refer to that category.

3 Exploring the temporal evolution of crop culture across

different regions

In this scenario, we assist Bob in his research to understand (i) the temporal evo-
lution of crop culture mention in the literature of different countries, and (ii) how
the cultivation methods evolve over time. Bob starts by searching for the coun-
tries of interest, e.g., France and Costa Rica (Figure 2a-b). As he is interested in
exploring the differences between cereal culture and livestock breeding, he filters
out non interesting crop cultures. Bob then zoom into each country to reveal
the distribution of publications per category (Figure 2c-d), where he observes a
similar count of publications. However, he wants to know if this distribution is
even across time periods. Thus, he uses the arrows next to the glyphs to deepen
the exploration by revealing the temporal distribution of those publications ac-
cording to the selected categories (Figure 2(e-f). The glyphs display the count
of publication over a time period from 2015 to 2018, where one can observe that
the literature in both countries refer to those cultures in a different frequency

4

Menin et al.

Fig. 2. Usage of PHiTGlyph. The user search for the countries of interest (a-b). They
navigate to the temporal distribution of publications per category using the arrows next
to the glyphs corresponding to each country (c-f). By zooming into the glyph, they
reveal the temporal distribution per subcategory (g-h). Then, to proceed their research
and compare crop culture across country, they access the associated publications to the
time period of interest (i-j).

in the years 2016 and 2017, when France has only references to either livestock
breeding (2016) or cereal culture (2017) while Costa Rica has references to both
crop categories. Going further, Bob zoom into the glyphs to reveal the temporal
distribution of crop reference within each category (Figure 2g-h) and explores
the associated publications to each crop to identify the differences between their
cultivation methods in each country (Figure 2i-j).

4 Conclusion and Future Work

In this paper, we propose the use of polymorphous glyphs to represent multiple
hierarchical levels and dimensions of spatio-temporal data. We rely on simple
visual channels (i.e. size and color) to support a smooth learning curve, while
providing interactions such as zoom and click to guide the user through the
different hierarchical levels and data dimensions. We demonstrated our approach
through a case study of the ISSA KG to support researchers in agriculture on
answering questions such as “where and when are crop cultures mentioned in
the literature?” and “how does a particular crop culture evolve over space and
time?”. A limitation of our approach refers to visual scalability: we illustrated it
through four topics and time periods, as we are limited by the number of colors
one can perceive visually. Although we mitigate the issue through filtering out
uninteresting information, studies are necessary to understand how our approach
deals with visual scalability and how efficiently is the proposed solution.

5 Acknowledgments

We would like to acknowledge Antoine Huot-Marchand and Loic Madern for
their work in the first implementation of the prototype.

PHiTGlyph

5

References

1. Borgo, R., Kehrer, J., Chung, D.H.S., Maguire, E., Laramee, R.S., Hauser, H.,
Ward, M., Chen, M.: Glyph-based Visualization: Foundations, Design Guidelines,
Techniques and Applications. Eurographics State of the Art Reports pp. 39–63
(2013), http://www.cg.tuwien.ac.at/research/publications/2013/borgo-2013-gly/,
iSBN: 1558608192

2. Castermans, T., Speckmann, B., Verbeek, K., Westenberg, M.A., Betti, A., Berg,
H.V.D.: Glammap: Geovisualization for e-Humanities. In: 2016 Workshop on Vi-
sualization for the Digital Humanities (2016)

3. Chen, W., Xia, J., Wang, X., Wang, Y., Chen, J., Chang, L.: RelationLines: Vi-
sual Reasoning of Egocentric Relations from Heterogeneous Urban Data. ACM
Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology 10(1), 2:1–2:21 (Dec 2018).
https://doi.org/10.1145/3200766, https://doi.org/10.1145/3200766

4. Liu, S., Maljovec, D., Wang, B., Bremer, P., Pascucci, V.: Visualizing high-
dimensional data: Advances in the past decade. IEEE Transactions on Visual-
ization and Computer Graphics 23(3), 1249–1268 (2017)

5. Munzner, T.: Visualization analysis and design. CRC press (2014)
6. Nobre, C., Streit, M., Meyer, M., Lex, A.: The state of the art in visualizing
multivariate networks. Computer Graphics Forum (EuroVis) 38, 807–832 (2019)
7. Roberts, J.C.: State of the art: Coordinated & multiple views in exploratory visu-
alization. In: Fifth International Conference on Coordinated and Multiple Views
in Exploratory Visualization (CMV 2007). pp. 61–71. IEEE (2007)

8. Toulet, A., Michel, F., Bobasheva, A., Menin, A., Dupr’e, S., Deboin, M.C., Winck-
ler, M., Tchechmedjiev, A.: Issa: generic pipeline, knowledge model and visualiza-
tion tools to help scientists search and make sense of a scientific archive. In: The
Semantic Web–ISWC 2022: 21st International Semantic Web Conference, Virtual
Event, October 23–27, 2022, Proceedings. pp. 660–677. Springer (2022)

9. Wang Baldonado, M.Q., Woodruff, A., Kuchinsky, A.: Guidelines for using multiple
views in information visualization. In: Proc. Working Conference on Advanced
visual interfaces. pp. 110–119 (2000)

10. Zeng, W., Fu, C.W., Arisona, S.M., Schubiger, S., Burkhard, R., Ma, K.L.:
Visualizing the Relationship Between Human Mobility and Points of Interest.
IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems 18(8), 2271–2284 (2017).
https://doi.org/10.1109/TITS.2016.2639320

