An Attempt to Fathom the Role of Annotations in
User-Centered Design Process
Jean-Luc Hak, Olivier Nicolas, Marco Winckler, Philippe Palanque

To cite this version:

Jean-Luc Hak, Olivier Nicolas, Marco Winckler, Philippe Palanque. An Attempt to Fathom the
Role of Annotations in User-Centered Design Process. 11th International Workshop on Research and
Practice Challenges for Engineering Interactive Systems (EISMS 2019), Jun 2019, Valencia, Spain.
pp.113-121. ￿hal-02879313￿

HAL Id: hal-02879313

https://hal.science/hal-02879313

Submitted on 23 Jun 2020

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

An Attempt to Fathom the Role of Annotations in 
User-Centered Design Process 

Jean Luc Hak 1,2, Olivier Nicolas 2 
1 Institut de Recherche en Informatique de Toulouse  
2 Softeam, Toulouse, France 
{jean-luc.hak, olivier.nicolas}@softeam.fr 

Marco Winckler 1,3 , Philippe Palanque 1 
3 Université Nice Sophia Antipolis 
Sophia Antipolis, France 
winckler@{irit.fr, unice.fr}, palanque@irit.fr 

ABSTRACT 
This  paper  investigate  the  role  played  by  annotation  along 
the  development  process  of  interactive  systems.  Empirical 
observations  have  demonstrated  that  development  teams 
often  make  an  extensive  use  of  annotations,  mainly  as  a 
communication  support.  Whilst  the  use  of  annotation  is  a 
fact (also supported by many prototyping environment, IDE 
and  model  editors),  very  few  studies  have  investigated  the 
use  of  the  annotations  for  building  interactive  systems.  In 
this  paper,  we  propose  a  process  to  explain  this  co-
evolution  of  annotations  and  artefacts  along 
the 
development  process  of  interactive  systems.  The  ultimate 
goal 
the 
to  follow  design  decisions  using 
development 
annotations as a support.  

is  provide  mechanisms 

that  could  help 

team 

Author Keywords 
Annotations, interactive system, design process.  

ACM Classification Keywords 
H.5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI): 
Miscellaneous. 

INTRODUCTION 
Design is a problem-solving process whose objective is find 
a  way  to  implement  requirements,  respecting  constraints, 
and  ensure  good  quality.  According  to  the  ISO  standard 
9241-210  (2008)  [1],  the  design  process  of  an  interactive 
systems  is  iterative:  design  solutions  are  created,  tested, 
revised, and improved until the development team produces 
a  proper  version  of  the  fully  fledge  system.  This  process 
produces two types of results: a specification of the design 
solution  to  be  implemented  (the  interactive  system)  and  a 
set of design decisions that drive the evolution of the design 
along the iteration cycles. 

interactive  specifications  and 

User  interface  prototypes  are  the  most  common  type  of 
artifacts  used  to  specify  design  solutions  for  interactive 
systems.  In  early  phases  of  the  development  process, 
drawings are acceptable as prototypes to support ideation of 
the  product  but  as  the  process  advances,  drawings  are 
then  by 
replaced  by 
executable  prototypes.  It  is  interesting  to  notice  that 
prototypes  are  useful  and  necessary  but  they  are  not 
sufficient  to  fully  specify  an  interactive  systems.  On  one 
is 
hand,  prototypes  are  not  self-explicative,  which 
illustrated  by  the  fact  that  annotations  have  to  be  used  to 
explain  for  instance  the  use  of  icons  in  a  design.  On  the 
inform  other 
other  hand,  prototypes  cannot  directly 

important  aspects  of  the  interactive  system,  for  that  other 
artefacts  such  as  task  models  [3],  dialog  models  and 
interaction models [4] must be used.  

have 

observations 

demonstrated 

Empirical 
that 
development  teams  often  make  an  extensive  use  of 
annotations  as  a  communication  support  [2].  It  is  a  basic 
assumption  that  decisions  made  by  the  development  team 
will  create  iteration  along  the  process  and  affect  the  way 
artefacts  must  evolve.  Indeed,  prototypes  and  artefacts 
evolve  along  the  development  process  and  many  of  the 
design  decisions  might  be  described  in  the  form  of 
annotations.  The  dangling  question  is:  What  happens  with 
annotations  in  a  UCD  development  process?  This  paper 
presents  a  micro-development  process  that  is  aimed  to 
describe  the  life  cycle  of  annotations  and  how  annotations 
co-evolve  with  artifacts  along  the  development  process  of 
interactive system. Moreover, we discuss how stakeholders 
might  make  better  use  of  annotations  for  improving  the 
communication in a UCD process.  

RELATED WORK 
The  first  studies  about  annotations  started  with  the 
identification  of  common  practices  by  university  students 
on their paper textbooks [5]. Paper-based annotations work 
as a conceptual model for electronic documents. Therefore, 
common  definitions  of  annotation  often  refer  to  text 
documents [6]. Kahn & Koivunen [7] define annotations as 
“user made statements”, consisting in a body (i.e. text note 
or  graphical  content),  a  link  (the  so-called  anchor)  to  the 
target  which  include  a  location  within  the  document  as 
well  as  other  metadata.  As  we  shall  see,  these  three 
elements (body, target and link) are core concepts not only 
for  paper-based  or  electronic  documents  but  they  are 
essential to understand how annotations applies to the many 
artefacts used to build interactive system as well.   

In  [8],  Li  et  al.  have  defined  a  classification  of  annotation 
approach  for  Computer-aided  Design.  This  classification 
identify the following categories of attributes that complete 
the  specification  of  annotation:  targeted  media,  audience, 
rendering  system,  usage  and  function,  representation,  and 
storage  location.  This  classification  of  annotations  bring 
another  complementary  view  of  annotations.  Based  on  the 
literature  on  text  and  electronic  documents  [5-12],  we  can 
summarize  three  main  functions  played  by  annotations:  to 
enrich  a  document,  to  support  communication  and  to 
support an intention/activity carried out by the author of the 

 
annotation. Whilst most of the literature in the matter refers 
to  text  documents,  that  classification  is  relevant  for  the 
development of interactive systems. 

More and more prototyping and IDE environments at least 
some  basic  mechanisms  for  annotating  artifacts [13].  Very 
recently,  the  W3C  proposed  a  standard  called  Web 
Annotation Data Model which was created for specifying a 
model  and  a  format  to  ensure  the  sharing  and  reuse  of 
annotations  across  different  hardware  and  platform.  All 
these  tools  testimony  of  the  increasing  importance  of 
annotation for building interactive systems. 

USE OF ANNOTATIONS BY STAKEHOLDERS  
Very  few  studies  have  investigated  how  annotations  could 
affect  the  development  of  interactive  systems  in  a  UCD 
process. The study performed by Gutierrez et al. [2] pointed 
out  that  annotations  are  used  by  members  of  development 
teams  to:  record  the  results  of  discussion  including 
decisions  and  upcoming  tasks,  communicate  and  inform 
other team  members of the  work done, gather internal and 
external  feedback  on  artefacts  stored  in  the  workspace, 
conduct  usability  evaluations  by  documenting  information 
and  by  recording  conversation  between  design  teams  and 
UX  experts,  justify  design  choices,  and  document  the 
design choices by describing them retrospectively.  

The  work  of  Gutierrez  et  al.  [2]  does  not  make  any 
distinction  between  types  of  stakeholders.  It  is  worthy  of 
recalling  the  classification  of  Winckler  et  al.  [16]  who 
identify  two  groups  of  stakeholders  taking  part  in  a  UCD 
process:  the  development  team  (which  encompass  roles 
having  responsibility  with  respect  to  the  production  of 
artefacts)  and  external  members  (such  as  clients  and  end-
users)  who  provide  opinions, 
requirements,  and/or 
constraints  for  the  design.  Interesting  to  notice  that  these 
two  groups  of 
the 
development process in iterative cycle.  

stakeholders  collaborate  along 

Thus,  regarding  the  use  of  annotations,  it  is  possible  to 
identify two main roles: the writer of the annotation and the 
readers. More generally, annotations is a mean to convey a 
large variate of intentions to the reader. Naghash et al [12] 
suggest  6 different  usages  of  annotations:  i)  clarifying  and 
explaining  the  design;  ii)  verifying  and  requesting  a 
verification from other designers or users; iii) exploring by 
asking questions to obtain more details on end users’ needs; 
iv) altering or requesting an alteration proposed by the end 
users; v) confirming and giving  feedback on a design; and 
vi) asking questions to the designers. 

Whilst  the  development  team  are  responsible  for  creating 
artefacts  and  make  use  of  annotation  to  coordinate  their 
activities,  external  member  might  use  annotations  to 
express opinions and comment on what is being developed.  
In  the  rest  of  this  paper,  we  assume  that  annotations  are 
suitable  communication  tools  that  must be  available  to  the 
diverse  stakeholder  (readers/writers)  that  take  part  in  the 
development process of interactive systems. 

LIFE CYCLE OF DESIGN ARTEFACTS 
The  Figure  1  represent  the  lifecycle  of  a  design  artefact 
within a UCD process. This process acknowledges that the 
creation  artefacts  are  a  starting  point  for  the  work. 
Nonetheless, it does not impose any artefact to be created, 
which might be dependent on project needs. After creation, 
the design team should be able to perform following tasks:  

  Edit  the  artefact,  either  for  enriching  it,  for  correcting 

it, or for making to match new requirements. 

  Archive the artefact within a workspace for future use.  
  Submit  the  artefact  for  evaluation,  which  leads  to  the 
creation  of  a  new  artefacts  such  as  an  “evaluation 
report”.  The  results  of  an  evaluation  have  their  own 
lifecycle  within  the  design  process  and  might  lead  to 
the  creation/updating  of  other  artefact  (ex.  new  user 
interface design is created following recommendations 
of  a  usability  evaluation).  These  outcomes  are 
represented  by 
labelled  “External 
influence”.  

the  red  arrow 

  Dispose the artefact, when it is no longer useful.  

Artefacts  might  pre-exist,  for  that,  the  process  includes  an 
“existing” state represented by the grey rectangle in Figure 
1. Depending on the collaborative tools used by the design 
team, a distinction can be made between a local copy and a 
shared  copy  of  the  artefact.  This  duplication  of  artefacts 
require  an  effort  of  synchronization  for  the  design  team 
who  have  to  manage  the  consistency  between  the  local 
copies of each contributor with the shared copy.  

LIFE CYCLE OF ANNOTATIONS 
It  is  interesting  to  notice  that  annotations  are,  at  some 
extension,  a  special  case  of  artefact.  Annotations  depends 
on  the  artefact  they  are  attached  to,  but  they  possess  their 
own  lifecycle  which  can  be  evolving  independently  from 
the design artefact. One particular aspect of the annotations 
in  a  UCD  process  is  that  annotations  can  be  related  to 
certain  versions  of  the  artefact  but  not  each  of  its  version 
(e.g. an annotation indicating to fix an error).  

The  life  cycle  of  an  annotation  shown  by  Figure  2  starts 
with  a  decision.  The  creation  might  be  motivated  by  a 
variety  of  reasons  and  influenced  by  external  influences 
(e.g.  in  reaction  of  other  annotations,  of  the  content  of  an 
artefact). This creation can occurs when the artefact is being 
consulted,  edited  or  evaluated.  After  its  creation,  the 
annotation is in a private state and only visible to its author. 
In  this  state,  the  annotation  can  be  updated  and  reviewed 
anytime  by  its  author.  Depending  on  the  annotation,  its 
author  can  decide  to  publish  it  to  make  it  visible  to  other 
members of the design team.  

Published  annotations  are  presented  to  the  different  actors 
of  the  design  process  who  can  argue  with  the  information 
contained in the annotation (which can lead to the creation 
of  an  annotation  as  a  response)  or  who  can  validate  the 
annotation to ensure its relevance toward the artefact and to 
assess its content.  

Figure 1. Life cycle of artefacts in a UCD process. 

Figure 2. Life Cicle of annotations in a UCD process. 

 
 
 
 
 
When  validated  by  stakeholders,  annotations  are  kept  as  a 
reference  about  activities  taking  place  along  the  design 
process (e.g. information on the requirements, appreciation 
marks  of  the  design,  highlight  of  problems).  These 
information  can  have  an  impact  on  other  design  artefacts 
which  is  represented  by  the  red  arrow.  For  instance,  a 
problem  on  a  prototype  identified  with  an  annotation  can 
motivate and justify a decision to edit the prototype in order 
to  fix  it.  After  that,  annotations  can  be  managed  by 
indicating that it has been processed. 

If  the  annotation  is  not  validated,  the  annotation  will  not 
have  an  impact  on  other  artefacts  or  for  future  uses  in  its 
current  state.  Similarly  to  artefacts,  annotations  can  be 
archived  for  keeping  the  annotation  in  its  current  state  or 
disposed when it is no longer useful. 

INFLUENCE  OF  ANNOTATIONS  AND 

RECIPROCAL 
ARTEFACTS 
Annotations  can  also  affect  the  evolution  but  are  also  be 
affected by the evolution of the artefact itself. Thus, while 
annotation  have  their  own  lifecycle,  this  lifecycle  is 
interweaved by the life cycle of annotated artefacts. 

An  annotation  is  created  or  updated  on  an  artefact  in 
reaction  to  the  content  of  the  artefact  as  illustrated  by  the 
red arrow “Induce the creation of annotations” in the Figure 
3. After the creation of the annotation, the annotation can be 
attached or detached to any artefact or fragment of artefact 
to include it to its target list represented with orange arrows.  

Figure 3. Artefact and annotation lifecycle dependencies. 

In return, the annotation can have an impact on the artefacts 
it is attached to. Indeed, annotation can be used a  medium 
of  communication  for  discussing,  for  contributing  to  the 
elaboration  of  an  artefact,  to  point  out  modifications  to 
make on the artefact. The content annotations can be varied 
from  the  topic  discussed,  the  intentions  of  the  persons 
involved 
the 
information,  and  the  quantity  of  information  contained. 
Depending  on  this  content,  several  type  of  impact  can  be 
identified:  no  modification  required  (e.g.  for  informative 

the  precision  of 

the  annotations, 

in 

to 

that  can 

impact  other  artefacts 

localized  modification  restricted 

annotations), 
the 
artefact (e.g. correcting a typo, adding a precision) or global 
modification 
(e.g. 
appearance  of  new  requirements  or  adjustment  of  existing 
requirements).  While  annotations  may  have  an  impact  on 
design artefacts, they are not always factual and can reflect 
opinions that should be nuanced and cross-referenced with 
others  opinions  or  concrete  facts  prior  to  taking  decisions. 
Thus,  annotations  can  be  used  to  motivate  or  support  a 
decision  regarding  the  artefact  as  illustrated  by  the  red 
arrow “Induce or support a decision”. 

Regarding the impacts of an annotation to the update of an 
artefact,  their  weight  can  depends  on  several  factors. 
Indeed, annotations can point out problems directly, reflect 
an  opinion  or  unverified  data  from  different  sources  and 
thus, the information conveyed needs to be validated. This 
can be done by several means such as checking the person 
involved  in  the  discussion,  analyzing  the  relevance  or  the 
trustworthiness  of  the  information.  After  the  validation, 
another aspect can be taken into account that can influence 
the impact on targeted artefacts. Indeed, a decision process 
can  be  integrated  prior  to  the  editing  of  the  artefact.  This 
decision  process  can  assess  the  cost  of  the  editing  and  its 
planning if the editing has been adopted by the design team. 

Another interaction between the artefact and the annotation 
is  the  mutual  update  they  can  trigger.  When  updating  an 
artefact,  the  content  of  each  annotations  attached  to  the 
artefact may be questioned or the state of the annotation can 
be updated to match it with the new state of the artefact. 

DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Annotations are a versatile tool for documenting the design 
by  associating  documents  or  by  explaining.  They  can  be 
used  for  communication,  for  planning  tasks,  for  reviewing 
the  design  and  by  allowing  stakeholders  to  highlight 
problems, to question the design or to give opinion.  

This  presented  the  connections  between  annotations  and 
artefacts  along  the  development  process  of  interactive 
systems. This work is an attempt to promote annotations as 
a  first  class  artefact  that  could  be  used  for  tracking  design 
decisions along the development process of interactive. 

Currently,  we  have  implemented  tools  that  allows  to 
connect annotations to multiple artefacts. Our ultimate goal 
is to develop tools that could help the development tool to 
make  a  better  use  of  annotations  to  communicate,  trace 
design decisions and follow the evolution of artefacts along 
the  development  process.  These  tools  are  suitable  for  a 
demonstration  and  future  work  will  encompass 
the 
evaluation of them with real users. In a long run, we expect 
that  our  tools  would  be  able  to  collect  design  decisions 
along many projects. The analyses of design decisions and 
their  association  with  the  evolution  of  artefacts,  might 
provide  useful  data  for  have  a  better  understanding  on  the 
real practice of UCD process.  

 
REFERENCES 
1. 

ISO 9241-210 2008. Ergonomics of human system 
interaction-Part 210: Human-centred design for 
interactive systems. Standard. International 
Organization for Standardization, Geneva, CH. 

2.  Marisela Gutierrez Lopez, Gustavo Rovelo, Mieke 

Haesen, Kris Luyten, Karin Coninx. Capturing Design 
Decision Rationale with Decision Cards. INTERACT 
(1) 2017: 463-482 

3.  Célia Martinie, David Navarre, Philippe A. Palanque, 

Camille Fayollas. A generic tool-supported framework 
for coupling task models and interactive applications. 
EICS 2015: 244-253. 

4.  Winckler, M., Vanderdonckt, J., Trindade, F., 

Stanciulescu, A. Cascading Dialog Modeling with 
UsiXML. International Workshop on the Design, 
Verification and Specification of Interactive Systems 
(DSVIS'2008). Kingston, Ontario, Canada, July 16-18 
2008. Springer LNCS 5136. pp. 121-135. 

5.  Catherine C. Marshall. 1997. Annotation: from paper 
books to the digital library. In Proceedings of the 
second ACM international conference on Digital 
libraries (DL '97). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 131-
140. DOI=10.1145/263690.263806 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/263690.263806 

6.  Bringay S., Barry C., Charley J., Annotations: A new 
type of document in the Electronic Health Record. 
Paper presented at the 2nd International Conference on 
Document Research and Development in Sciences, arts 
and business: DOCAM 2004, University of California, 
Berkeley, Etats-Unis, octobre 2004. 

7.  José Kahan and Marja-Ritta Koivunen. 2001. Annotea: 

an open RDF infrastructure for shared Web 
annotations. In Proceedings of the 10th international 
conference on World Wide Web (WWW '01). ACM, 
New York, NY, USA, 623-632. 
DOI=http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/371920.372166 

8.  Li, C & Mcmahon, Chris & Newnes, Linda. (2009). 
Annotation in design processes: Classification of 
approaches. DS 58-8: Proceedings of ICED 09, the 
17th International Conference on Engineering Design. 
251-262.  

9.  Manuel Zacklad. Annotation : attention, association, 
contribution. Annotations dans les Documents pour 
l'Action, Hermes science publications, pp.29-46, 2007.  

10.  Lortal G., Lewkowicz M., Todirascu-Courtier A., 

2005, Annotation: Textual Media for Cooperation, in 
Proceedings of Annotation for Cooperation Workshop 
November 24-25th  (p.41-50)  

11.  Maristella Agosti, Giorgetta Bonfiglio-Dosio, and 
Nicola Ferro. 2007. A historical and contemporary 
study on annotations to derive key features for systems 
design. Int. J. Digit. Libr. 8, 1 (October 2007), 1-19. 
DOI=http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00799-007-0010-0  

12.  Amir M. Naghsh, Andy Dearden, and Mehmet B. 

Özcan. 2005. Investigating annotation in electronic 
paper-prototypes. In Proceedings of the 12th 
international conference on Interactive Systems: 
design, specification, and verification (DSVIS'05), 
Stephen W. Gilroy and Michael D. Harrison (Eds.).  

13.  Silva, T. R., Hak, J-L., Winckler, M. Nicolas, O. A 

Comparative Study of Milestones for Featuring GUI 
Prototyping Tools. Journal of Software Engineering 
and Applications (JSEA), Vol.10 No.6, June 23, 2017, 
ISSN Online: 1945-3124, ISSN Print: 1945-3116, PP. 
564-589, DOI: 10.4236/jsea.2017.106031 

14.  W3C. Web Annotation Data Model. Available at: 

https://www.w3.org/TR/annotation-model (April 30, 
2019, last visit). 

15.  Jean-Luc Hak, Marco Antonio Winckler, David 

Navarre. PANDA: prototyping using annotation and 
decision analysis. 8th ACM SIGCHI conference 
Engineering Interactive Computing Systems 
(EICS2016), Jun 2016, Brussels, Belgium. EICS ’16: 
Proceedings of the 8th ACM SIGCHI Symposium on 
Engineering Interactive Computing Systems, pp. 171-
176, 2016. <hal-01712526> 

16.  Winckler, M., Palanque, P., Farenc, C., Pimenta, M. 

Who does what with whom in Web Development? 2nd 
International Workshop on Task Models and Diagrams 
for User Interface Design - TAMODIA’2003, 
Heraklion, Greece, June 2003. 

 
 
