SIMBAL: A structural-functional plant model to
simulate C and N dynamics and shoot-root architecture
of winter oilseed rape associated with legumes
Laurène Perthame, Frédéric Rees, Xavier Cornilleau, Céline Richard-Molard,

Christophe Pradal, Alexandra Jullien

To cite this version:

Laurène Perthame, Frédéric Rees, Xavier Cornilleau, Céline Richard-Molard, Christophe Pradal, et
al.. SIMBAL: A structural-functional plant model to simulate C and N dynamics and shoot-root
architecture of winter oilseed rape associated with legumes. FSPM2023 - 10th International Conference
on Functional-Structural Plant Model, Mar 2023, Berlin, Germany. ￿hal-04262992￿

HAL Id: hal-04262992

https://hal.inrae.fr/hal-04262992

Submitted on 27 Oct 2023

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

Copyright

Book of Abstracts 

FSPM2023 

SIMBAL: A structural-functional plant model to simulate C and N dynamics and 
shoot-root architecture of winter oilseed rape associated with legumes.  

Laurène Perthame1, Frédéric Rees1, Xavier Cornilleau1, Céline Richard-Molard1, Christophe Pradal2,3, 
Alexandra Jullien1 

1 Université Paris-Saclay, INRAE, AgroParisTech, UMR EcoSys, 91120 Palaiseau, France 
2 AGAP, Univ. Montpellier, CIRAD, INRAE, SupAgro, Montpellier, France 
3 INRIA, Univ. Montpellier, France 

For correspondence: laurene.perthame@agroparistech.fr 

Keywords: plant model, fababean, plant-plant interactions, FSPM for agroecology 

Introduction 

Species  mixtures  are  of  great  interest  to  promote  low-input  agricultural  practices  while 
maintaining  agricultural  production.  For  example,  winter  oilseed  rape  sown  with  a  frost 
sensitive legume reduces the use of nitrogen fertilizer and herbicide while maintaining yield at 
levels equivalent to pure cropping (Lorin et al., 2016). A disadvantage of such mixtures is that 
the  legume  might  compete  with  the  cash  crop  for  resources  and  reduce  yield.  To  optimize 
management  of  these  mixtures,  it  is  necessary  to  better  understand  the  ecophysiological 
processes  that  drive  the  sharing  of  resources  between  plants  (e.g.  carbon  and  nitrogen). 
Mechanistic functional-structural modeling (FSM) is particularly suitable for such studies as it 
allows the analysis of the processes underlying plant-plant interactions and integrates both 
the architectural growth processes of the plant and its functioning (e.g. acquisition/allocation 
of resources) (Louarn and Song, 2020). For example, the model Virtual Grassland (Louarn et 
al., 2014) simulates competition for C, N and water between several herbaceous and legume 
species.  However,  no  FSM  for  mixtures  of  annual  crops  with  frost  sensitive  legume  that 
considers the feedback of the carbon/nitrogen functioning in both shoots and roots has been 
developed  so  far.  Such  a  modeling  approach  is  shown  in  this  study,  with  the  aim  of  filling 
knowledge gaps on the role of carbon-nitrogen interactions in plastic responses of plants in 
mixtures, by taking the case study of winter oilseed rape sown with frost sensitive fababean 
at vegetative stage. 

Conceptual framework of C and N fluxes 

The model SIMBAL (SIMulated Brassica Associated with Legumes) is based on the ARNICA 
FSM developed for Arabidopsis thaliana (Richard-Molard et al., 2009). The model simulates 
shoot and root architecture of winter oilseed rape in which C and N fluxes determine the growth 
of each organ (leaf, internode, root segment). C is preferentially given to shoot and N to roots. 
As showed in Fig.1, the total internal N amount results from root uptake and remobilization 
from storage (1) and determine the increment of leaf and internode area (4). N in leaves is 
distributed  along  the  light  gradient  within  the  plant,  while  N  in  internodes  is  distributed 
homogeneously  (3).  The  total  internal  C  quantity  results  from  photosynthesis  (6)  and 
remobilization of C storage (9). Root growth results from the N available to roots (2) and the 
C available after satisfaction of shoot demand (7). C storage is filled if total internal C quantity 
is superior to C organ demands (calculated as the C quantity necessary to produce a unit of 
leaf, internode or root surface) (9). N storage is filled from leaf senescence (driven by a leaf 
lifespan) (5) and when N quantity for shoot is superior to N used for actual total photosynthetic 
area (8). When the crop is grown in association with fababean rather than in monoculture, the 
light availability to the plant is reduced and parameters value such as phyllochron are modified 
based on experiments. 

1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Book of Abstracts 

FSPM2023 

Fig.1: Conceptual framework of C and N dynamics and organ growth underlying the SIMBAL model 

Towards a model of rapeseed and fababean mixture at the entire crop cycle 

A first FSPM was built to study the N and C fluxes and organ growth within a whole plant of 
winter oilseed rape at the vegetative stage in OpenAlea (Pradal et al., 2008). This conceptual 
framework  aims  to  be  generic  and  adaptable  to  other  species,  in  particular  frost  sensitive 
fababean. In the near future, we intend to develop the model upon the entire crop cycle of 
winter oilseed rape and to assess the effect of frost sensitive fababean on oilseed rape growth 
and CN functioning through direct (competition for light harvest and N uptake) and indirect 
(degradation of N-rich legume residues) effects.  

References 
Lorin et al., 2016, Field Crops Res. 193, 24-33, doi: 10.1016/j.fcr.2016.03.002 
Louarn et al., 2014, The future of European Grasslands. 242 
Louarn and Song, 2020, Ann. Bot. 126: 501-509, doi: 10.1093/aob/mcaa143 
Pradal et al., 2008, Funct. Plant Biol. 35(10): 751-760, 10.1071/FP08084  
Richard-Molard et al., 2009, C.B.P, 153(2), S229, doi: 10.1016/j.cbpa.2009.04.634 

2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
