Identification of shoot architectural traits to promote
winter oilseed rape vigour during the vegetative growth:
a simulation approach
Laurène Perthame, Christophe Pradal, Alexandra Jullien, Frédéric Rees,

Céline Richard-Molard, Grumel Arman

To cite this version:

Laurène Perthame, Christophe Pradal, Alexandra Jullien, Frédéric Rees, Céline Richard-Molard, et al..
Identification of shoot architectural traits to promote winter oilseed rape vigour during the vegetative
growth: a simulation approach. IRC 2023 - 16th International Rapeseed Congress, Sep 2023, Sydney,
Australia. ￿hal-04263001￿

HAL Id: hal-04263001

https://hal.inrae.fr/hal-04263001

Submitted on 27 Oct 2023

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

Copyright

Identification of shoot architectural traits to promote winter oilseed rape vigour 
during the vegetative growth: a simulation approach. 

L. Perthame1, C Pradal2,3, A Jullien1, F Rees1, C Richard-Molard1, A. Grumel1 

 1 Université Paris-Saclay, INRAE, AgroParisTech, UMR EcoSys, 91120 Palaiseau, France  
2 AGAP, Univ. Montpellier, CIRAD, INRAE, SupAgro, Montpellier, France  
3 INRIA, Univ. Montpellier, France 

Background: 

Winter oilseed rape (WOSR) cultivation can often face implantation difficulties due to the 
lack of water at the beginning of growth and/or to pest damages, recently increased by 
climate change and environmental regulations. Farmers are therefore looking for more 
vigorous cultivars, which are able to better resist to such stresses thanks to their high carbon 
uptake efficiency, and ensure crop establishment and yield. 

Objective: 

Our work aimed to identify and classify important shoot architectural traits of WOSR during 
the vegetative growth to improve light capture, and favour the selection of vigorous WOSR 
cultivars. 

Methods: 

Our strategy was to build a model of leaf area establishment of WOSR at vegetative stage, 
to calibrate and evaluate it with experimental architectural data on isolated plants, and to 
connect it to a light interception model. 

Our model describes the establishment of leaf area through time (expressed in 
degree.days), with a 3D representation of the leaves and their geometry. We use 
phyllochron (e.g. time between the emergence of two leaves) to parameterize the 
appearance of a new leaf over time. Leaves are separated by an angle of 137,5 °. Each leaf 
is characterized by its length of the limb, from which infers its width, leaf area, petiole length 
and curvature angle through allometric relationships. Limb length, and thus leaf area, grows 
depending on thermal time, according to a speed growth parameter and a maximal leaf 
area, which varies with the total leaf area of the plant. This architectural model was 
connected the architectural model to a light interception model (Caribu; Chelle and Andrieu, 
1998), in OpenAlea modelling platform (Pradal et al., 2008). 

Future results that will be showcase during the presentation are our model assemble (light 
interception model and leaf area establishment model) used to simulate a wide range of 
phenotypes and estimate which parameters (e.g. phyllochron, leaf length, leaf curvature 
angle, leaf speed growth) can maximize light capture, depending on plant density.  

Conclusions: 

We developed a new data-driven 3D architectural model of leaf area establishment for 
WOSR during the vegetative growth. Such model represents a powerful tool to design 
ideotypes that improve light capture and guide the selection of vigorous WOSR cultivars. In 
the near future, we intend to add metabolic processes (C acquisition and effects on leaf area 
expansion and biomass) and complete the model during the entire crop cycle. 

References: 

 
 
 
 
 
Chelle, M., Andrieu, B. (1998). The nested radiosity model for the distribution of light within 
plant canopies. Ecological Modelling, 111, 75–91. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0304-
3800(98)00100-8 

Pradal C., et al. (2008). OpenAlea: A visual programming and component-based software 
platform for plant modeling. Functional Plant Biology, 35 (10), pp.751-760. 10.1071/FP08084 

 
