Metadatamatic: A Web application to Create a Dataset
Description
Pierre Maillot, Olivier Corby, Catherine Faron, Fabien Gandon, Franck Michel

To cite this version:

Pierre Maillot, Olivier Corby, Catherine Faron, Fabien Gandon, Franck Michel. Metadatamatic: A
Web application to Create a Dataset Description. WWW ’23 - The ACM Web Conference 2023, Apr
2023, Austin TX, United States. pp.123-126, ￿10.1145/3543873.3587328￿. ￿hal-04171196￿

HAL Id: hal-04171196

https://hal.science/hal-04171196

Submitted on 26 Jul 2023

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

Metadatamatic: A Web application to Create a Dataset
Description
Olivier Corby
Univ. Cote d’Azur, Inria, CNRS, I3S
Sophia Antpolis, France
olivier.corby@inria.fr

Pierre Maillot
Univ. Cote d’Azur, Inria, CNRS, I3S
Sophia Antpolis, France
pierre.maillot@inria.fr

Catherine Faron
Univ. Cote d’Azur, Inria, CNRS, I3S
Sophia Antpolis, France
faron@i3s.unice.fr

Fabien Gandon
Univ. Cote d’Azur, Inria, CNRS, I3S
Sophia Antpolis, France
fabien.gandon@inria.fr

Franck Michel
Univ. Cote d’Azur, CNRS, Inria, I3S
Sophia Antpolis, France
franck.michel@inria.fr

ABSTRACT
This article introduces Metadatamatic, an open-source, online, user-
friendly tool for generating the description of a knowledge base.
It supports the description of any RDF dataset via a user-friendly
web form that does not require prior knowledge of the vocabularies
begin used, and can enrich the description with automatically gen-
erated statistics if the dataset is accessible from a public SPARQL
endpoint. We discuss the models and methods behind the tool, and
present some initial results suggesting that Metadatamatic can help
in increasing the visibility of public knowledge bases.

CCS CONCEPTS
• Information systems → Information integration; Resource
Description Framework (RDF); Web applications.

KEYWORDS
metadata, provenance, datasets, linked data, RDF, semantic web

ACM Reference Format:
Pierre Maillot, Olivier Corby, Catherine Faron, Fabien Gandon, and Franck
Michel. 2023. Metadatamatic: A Web application to Create a Dataset Descrip-
tion. In Companion Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2023 (WWW ’23
Companion), April 30-May 4, 2023, Austin, TX, USA. ACM, New York, NY,
USA, 4 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3543873.3587328

1 INTRODUCTION
The deployment of semantic web technologies [1] is driven by the
desire, among others, to improve the findability, accessibility, inter-
operability, reusability, and reliability of data. In multiple domains,
a growing number of knowledge bases (KBs) are made publicly
available either through public SPARQL endpoints or download-
able RDF dumps. For instance, DBpedia is generated by turning
information from Wikipedia pages into RDF.

To ensure the FAIR properties, KGs should provide rich metadata
typically encompassing authors, licensing, provenance information,

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
WWW ’23 Companion, April 30-May 4, 2023, Austin, TX, USA
© 2023 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-9419-2/23/04.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3543873.3587328

access interfaces, and a succinct overview of their content. There
are several vocabularies available for writing such descriptions in
RDF, with VoID [3], DCAT [9] and SPARQL-SD [8] being recom-
mended by the W3C. However, during an experiment on a large
number of publicly accessible KBs, we observed that less than 10%
of them contain some form of provenance information [5], which
is detrimental to their traceability and reusability.

In practice, the task of writing a KB description requires a solid
understanding of multiple vocabularies in addition to VoID, DCAT,
and SPARQL-SD, depending on the domain of interest. To alleviate
this burden, this article presents a tool that supports the genera-
tion of a KG description without requiring prior knowledge of the
vocabularies.

2 MOTIVATION
In a previous study [5], we attempted to retrieve the descriptions of
339 active KBs whose SPARQL endpoints were collected from pub-
lic catalogues such as the LOD-Cloud, LinkedWiki and Wikidata.
The results of this experimentation are represented graphically in
KartoGraphi [4]. These results revealed that only 33 out of 339 KBs
contained any form of description. Among those with a description,
26 KBs contained information about their creators, contributors
or publishers, 18 contained temporal information about their cre-
ation or publication, and 16 contained information about their
licenses. We also attempted to retrieve the description hosted as
.well-known/void files, as recommended in the VoID vocabulary,
but found only 10 such files for the 339 KBs.

We attribute the lack of self-description in publicly available KBs
to the lack of incentive and the difficulty of writing and maintain-
ing these descriptions, starting with identifying which of the many
vocabularies are appropriate. We assessed at least 11 vocabularies
that are classically used for the general description of a KB (listed in
Table 1), yet some authors found up to 32 possible vocabularies for
that task [2]. These vocabularies are both complementary and over-
lapping. More domain-specific vocabularies can also be used, such
as the extension of DCAT for geographic datasets GeoDCAT [7].
Many articles have recommended “description profiles” in various
use-cases and using various vocabularies, as shown in the survey
by Benelli et al. [2].

While many parts of a description, such as statistics, can be
extracted automatically, it remains necessary for KB providers to
manually enter important parts of the description such as licensing

WWW ’23 Companion, April 30-May 4, 2023, Austin, TX, USA

Maillot et al.

and authoring information. Besides, identifying the appropriate
classes and properties from the various vocabularies can be chal-
lenging. Initiatives such as DCAT-AP [6] or the COST Action for
Distributed Knowledge Graphs have proposed lists of classes and
properties for each description feature, but effectively writing the
description remains a burdensome task.

The aim of Metadatamatic is to tackle the manual description
challenge by providing a user-friendly method for creating a KB
description via a web form, enriched with statistics automatically
generated from the KB, and represented in RDF using the vocabu-
laries recommended by the community.

3 PRINCIPLES
Describing a KB is not a straightforward task, as several elements
must be considered. For example, one must consider whether each
named graph is a dataset of its own, or all the named graphs are
part of the same dataset. One must also consider the level of detail
required in the description, such as a precise description of each step
of the process that generated the KB. To guide those decisions, we
have studied existing vocabularies and proposals, and selected a KB
description model that is as close as possible to the consensus that
is currently emerging from the various initiatives. Moreover, the
need for exhaustiveness can make the description process tedious,
particularly in the case of large and complex KBs. To make the
process simpler, a description tool must be able to extract as much
information from the KB as possible. The following subsections
explain how we support these principles.

3.1 A comprehensive description model
The survey [2] indicates that there are numerous vocabularies that
can be used to represent the same features of a KB description.
Using the results of our experiments with KartoGraphi [4], we
studied the vocabularies used in the descriptions that we were able
to gather, as well as the elements proposed in VoID, DCAT, DCAT-
AP and DataID. From this study, we carefully selected 11 candidate
vocabularies, listed in Table 1, that we could potentially used in the
descriptions generated by Metadatamatic.

We retained three widely used and specialised vocabularies: VoID,
DCAT, and SPARQL-SD, in addition to Dublin Core Terms for gen-
eral properties such as the title and description of a KB. Other
vocabularies were not used for various reasons. Some vocabularies
are somehow restricted to specific communities, such as DataID. In
our experiments, some well-known vocabularies like Schema.org
and SKOS showed limited usage in this specific context of describing
KBs. PROV-O and PAV are used to represent provenance informa-
tion, yet different patterns are used to account for this information.
As a consequence, a static web form would need to opt for a specific
pattern and, arguably, would lack the flexibility required to be really
helpful.

3.2 Automated description extraction
Metadatamatic converts the content of the web form into RDF, and
utilises the previously proposed IndeGx framework [5] to extract
KB descriptions from their content. We reused the SPARQL queries
from this framework to extract various data from the content of the
KB: list of vocabularies, language tags and named graphs, as well as

Figure 1: Number of endpoints, out of a total of 339, for which
IndeGx was able to process a given characteristic.

the numbers of classes, properties and triples. Figure 1 shows the
number of KBs that returned a result when IndeGx tried to retrieve
the different description features from 339 endpoints. In particular,
we can see that less than 15% of the endpoints managed to answer
to the queries designed to extract the languages and the number of
triples. This can be explained by the fact that those queries require
to process respectively all the literals and all the triples of a KB,
and therefore frequently time out.

Although some of these queries do not succeed, this automated
extraction greatly reduces the effort for the user, particularly when
dealing with KBs that contain a large number of named graphs and
vocabularies. For example, the Scholarly Data base [10] contains
more than thirty named graphs.

Some features such as the KB license and languages have a
limited set of most frequent values. To make the form more user-
friendly, Metadatamatic suggests such frequent values with auto-
completion. The values suggested for the license come from the
RDFLicense dataset, while the values suggested for the languages
come from the LexVo dataset.

3.3 Description augmentation with aligned

vocabularies

As mentioned above, multiple vocabularies can be used in a KB
description and some of them have overlaps. Although using all
available vocabularies simultaneously would make the description
more tedious, in particular the part that is automatically generated,
it would make the information more easily accessible and findable
since users would not need to figure out which vocabularies were
used. Therefore, for certain features, Metadatamatic can add equiv-
alent triples using properties from other recognized vocabularies.
Table 2 show the properties and types used in the description in-
titially generated, and lists equivalent properties and types added
once the use hits the Apply equivalences button.

Metadatamatic: A Web application to Create a Dataset Description

WWW ’23 Companion, April 30-May 4, 2023, Austin, TX, USA

Vocabulary Short description

DCAT
DCTerms
DataID
FOAF

PAV
PROV-O

Description of a catalog of KBs
General description
Kb description, extends DCAT
Description of persons
Provenance description, extends PROV-O
Provenance description

Vocabulary
Schema.org
SKOS

Short description
General description
Concept description
SPARQL-SD Endpoint description

VCard
VoID

People and organisations description
KB description

Table 1: Most well-known vocabularies usable to describe a KB. The vocabularies in bold are those used in the description
generated by Metadatamatic. Those is italic are those added after augmentation with aligned vocabularies.

Description feature
Dataset rdf:type
Title
Description
Creator
Publication date
Version
Language
DataService rdf:type
DataService endpoint

Initial property or type Properties/types added after augmentation
dcat:Dataset
dct:title
dct:description
dct:creator
dct:issued
dcat:version
dct:language
dcat:DataService
dcat:endpointURL

dcmitype:Dataset, void:Dataset, sd:Dataset, schema:Dataset, prov:Entity
schema:name
schema:description
prov:wasAttributedTo, pav:authoredBy, pav:createdBy
schema:datePublished
schema:version, dct:hasVersion, pav:version
schema:inLanguage
sd:Service
sd:endpoint

Table 2: Augmentation of the KB description with aligned vocabularies.

4 OPEN SOURCE AND ONLINE APPLICATION
Metadatamatic is accessible online1 and its code is available on
GitHub under the Apache 2.0 open source license. Figure 2 shows
the web interface and main sections of Metadatamatic. As can be
seen, the form consists of multiple sections, each dedicated to a
feature of the KB description: title, description, endpoint URL, etc.
For each description feature, one or multiple values can be added
depending on the feature, e.g. there can be multiple titles but only
one publication date. The translation of each feature to RDF is dis-
played in Turtle beneath the feature, and the complete description
is displayed at the bottom of the page and can be downloaded.

The user may also import a KB description which Metadatamatic
uses to populate the form, thus making it possible to improve an
existing description.

Let us now consider the example of the description of the French
chapter of DBpedia. Metadatamatic offers the possibility to enter
different titles and descriptions in different languages. They use
respectively the dct:title and dct:description properties. En-
tering a SPARQL endpoint URL allows Metadatamatic to extract
features directly from the endpoint. The endpoint is also added
to the KB description with property void:sparqlEndpoint, and
entails the creation of a resource of type dcat:DataService. In
the license section, a list of suggestions is proposed by name and
URI of well-known licenses. Upon selection, the URI of the license
is entered as value of the dct:license property. The vocabularies,
languages, triples, classes and properties features are extracted from
the endpoint, they are respectively described using dct:language,
void:triples, void:vocabulary, void:triples, void:classes,
void:properties. The named graphs are also extracted atomat-
ically and described using a data structure from SPARQL-SD. At

1https://wimmics.github.io/voidmatic/

the time we did the extraction, the form yielded a description that
consists of over 160 triples, whereas only 5 values were entered
manually. The result of our description of the French chapter of
DBpedia appears in Turtle as shown in Listing 1.

Listing 1: Extract of the description of the French chapter of
DBpedia, in Turtle format.
(cid:7)
ex:dataset1 a dcat:Dataset;

(cid:4)

dct:creator wimmics:, culturegouvfr:, inria:;
dct:description "DBpedia Fr is the french chapter of DBpedia, it

is part of the DBpedia internationalization effort whose
purpose is to maintain structured data extracted (...)"@en;

dct:license cc4:;
dct:title "DBpedia French chapter"@en;
void:sparqlEndpoint fr:sparql;
void:classes 806;
void:properties 27461;
void:triples 20572176;
void:vocabulary bibo:, cc:, dc:, dcat:, dct:, foaf:, geo:,

georss:, goodrelations:, oa:, openvocab:, owl:, powders:,
pro:, prov:, schema:, rdf:, rdfs:, skos:, sd:, vann:, voaf:,
vcard:, void:, wde:;

sd:namedGraph

[a sd:NamedGraph; sd:name frgraph:metadata ],
[a sd:NamedGraph; sd:name frgraph:process_tags ],
[a sd:NamedGraph; sd:name frgraph:statistics ],
...
ex:dataset1-service

a dcat:DataService;
dcat:endpointURL fr:sparql;
dcat:servesDataset ex:dataset1.

(cid:6)

(cid:5)

5 RESULTS
Since the launch of Metadatamatic on 12/08/2022, we started to col-
lect descriptions of datasets that were not in the public catalogues,
such as Wikidata, LinkedWiki, and the LOD-Cloud. Among them,
the following datasets were never publicly described before:

WWW ’23 Companion, April 30-May 4, 2023, Austin, TX, USA

Maillot et al.

void:classes 23;
void:properties 470;
void:triples 16459098;
void:vocabulary <http://erlangen-crm.org/current/>,

<http://datamusee.givingsense.eu/onto/>;
sd:namedGraph semjograph:dataid, semjograph:dmcreators.
semjograph:dataid a sd:NamedGraph; sd:name semjograph:dataid.
semjograph:dmcreators a sd:NamedGraph; sd:name semjograph:dmcreators.
(cid:6)

(cid:5)

6 CONCLUSION
Metadatamatic was designed in the context of the DeKaLoG and
D2KAB ANR projects. This service was motivated by the lack of
dataset descriptions observed in the IndeGx framework experi-
mentation and its visualization in the KartoGraphI website. We
have shown how this open-source and online tool assists users in
generating a description of their datasets without requiring prior
knowledge of any vocabularies, and how it offers automated extrac-
tion and augmentation features to simplify the description process.
We also showed that, as soon as it was released, this tool allowed us
to make visible datasets that were unknown to major linked datasets
indexes so far. Future works include the generation of FAIRness and
accountability indicators to further improve the metadata available
for linked open data sources.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work is supported by the ANR DeKaloG (Decentralized Knowl-
edge Graphs) project, ANR-19-CE23-0014, and by the ANR D2KAB
(Data to Knowledge in Agriculture and Biodiversity) project, ANR-
18-CE23-0017, both projects from CE23 - Intelligence artificielle
and by the 3IA Côte d’Azur ANR-19-P3IA-0002.

REFERENCES
[1] Dean Allemang, James A Hendler, and Fabien Gandon. 2020. Semantic web for

the working ontologist. ACM Press.

[2] Mohamed Ben Ellefi, Zohra Bellahsene, John Breslin, Elena Demidova, Stefan
Dietze, Julian Szymanski, and Konstantin Todorov. 2017. RDF Dataset Profiling -
a Survey of Features, Methods, Vocabularies and Applications. Semantic Web 9
(08 2017). https://doi.org/10.3233/SW-180294

[3] Richard Cyganiak, Jun Zhao, Michael Hausenblas, and Keith Alexander. 2011.
Describing Linked Datasets with the VoID Vocabulary. W3C Note. W3C. https:
//www.w3.org/TR/void/

[4] Pierre Maillot, Olivier Corby, Catherine Faron, Fabien Gandon, and Franck Michel.
2022. KartoGraphI: Drawing a Map of Linked Data. In Extended Semantic Web
Conference. Springer.

[5] Pierre Maillot, Olivier Corby, Catherine Faron, Fabien Gandon, and Franck Michel.
2023. IndeGx: A Model and a Framework for Indexing RDF Knowledge Graphs
with SPARQL-based Test Suits. Journal of Web Semantics (Jan. 2023), 100775.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.websem.2023.100775
of

[6] Interoperable

Programme

Europe

the

European Commission.
https:

DCAT Application Profile for data portals in Europe.

2022.
//joinup.ec.europa.eu/collection/semantic-interoperability-community-
semic/solution/dcat-application-profile-data-portals-europe/release/211

[7] Andrea Perego, Vlado Cetl, Anders Friis-Christensen, and Michael Lutz. 2017.
GeoDCAT-AP: Representing geographic metadata by using the “DCAT applica-
tion profile for data portals in Europe”. In Joint UNECE/UNGGIM Europe Workshop
on Integrating Geospatial and Statistical Standards, Stockholm, Sweden.

[8] Gregory Williams. 2013. SPARQL 1.1 Service Description. W3C Recommenda-
https://www.w3.org/TR/2013/REC-sparql11-service-description-

tion. W3C.
20130321/.

[9] Peter Winstanley, David Browning, Riccardo Albertoni, Alejandra Gonzalez
Beltran, Simon Cox, and Andrea Perego. 2020. Data Catalog Vocabulary (DCAT)
- Version 2. W3C Recommendation. W3C. https://www.w3.org/TR/2020/REC-
vocab-dcat-2-20200204/.

[10] Ziqi Zhang, Andrea Giovanni Nuzzolese, and Anna Lisa Gentile. 2017. Entity
Deduplication on ScholarlyData. In Proceedings of ESWC 2017 (Lecture Notes in
Computer Science). Springer.

Figure 2: Example of Metadatamatic’s web interface with a
subset of the sections

• The knowledge graph SemJoconde describing the French
museums: in addition to the description features manually
entered, Metadatamatic computed that it contains 16459098
triples, 24 classes, 474 properties and 101 named graphs.
• The UNESCO vocabularies endpoint created by the UNESCO
under the Creative Commons 4.0 license: in addition to the
description features manually entered, Metadatamatic auto-
matically retrieved the 5 different languages of its literals.
• The SMS ontology, by the Smart Morphing and Sensing
consortium: in addition to the description features manually
entered, Metadatamatic computed the number of triples in
the dataset.

Listing 2 presents the RDF description of SemJoconde generated by
Metadatamatic.

Listing 2: Extract of the description of the SemJoconde
dataset, in Turtle format.
(cid:7)
ex:dataset2 a dcat:Dataset, sd:Dataset;

(cid:4)

dct:title "SemJoconde"@en;
dct:description "Representation semantique, basee

sur CIDOC-CRM, de la base Joconde"@fr;

dct:creator "Jean-Claude Moissinac";
dct:issued "2018-02-12"^^xsd:dateTime;
dcat:keyword "artworks", "cultural heritage",

"creators", "joconde database";

dct:language "fr", "en";
void:sparqlEndpoint semjoconde:query;

