Overview of BirdCLEF 2020: Bird Sound Recognition in
Complex Acoustic Environments
Stefan Kahl, Mary Clapp, W Alexander Hopping, Hervé Goëau, Hervé Glotin,

Robert Planqué, Willem-Pier Vellinga, Alexis Joly

To cite this version:

Stefan Kahl, Mary Clapp, W Alexander Hopping, Hervé Goëau, Hervé Glotin, et al.. Overview of
BirdCLEF 2020: Bird Sound Recognition in Complex Acoustic Environments. CLEF 2020 - Confer-
ence and Labs of the Evaluation Forum, Sep 2020, Thessaloniki, Greece. ￿hal-02989101￿

HAL Id: hal-02989101

https://inria.hal.science/hal-02989101

Submitted on 5 Nov 2020

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

Overview of BirdCLEF 2020: Bird Sound
Recognition in Complex Acoustic Environments

Stefan Kahl1, Mary Clapp2, W. Alexander Hopping1, Herv´e Go¨eau3, Herv´e
Glotin4, Robert Planqu´e5, Willem-Pier Vellinga5, and Alexis Joly6

1 Center for Conservation Bioacoustics, Cornell Lab of Ornithology, Cornell
University, NY, USA, {sk2487, wah63}@cornell.edu
2 University of California, Davis, CA, USA, mkclapp@ucdavis.edu
3 CIRAD, UMR AMAP, Montpellier, France, herve.goeau@cirad.fr
4 Universit´e de Toulon, Aix Marseille Univ, CNRS, LIS, DYNI team,
Marseille, France, herve.glotin@univ-tln.fr
5 Xeno-canto Foundation, The Netherlands, {wp,bob}@xeno-canto.org
6 Inria/LIRMM ZENITH team, Montpellier, France,
alexis.joly@inria.fr

Abstract. Passive acoustic monitoring is a cornerstone of the assess-
ment of ecosystem health and the improvement of automated assessment
systems has the potential to have a transformative impact on global bio-
diversity monitoring, at a scale and level of detail that is impossible with
manual annotation or other more traditional methods. The BirdCLEF
challenge—as part of the 2020 LifeCLEF Lab [12]—focuses on the devel-
opment of reliable detection systems for avian vocalizations in continuous
soundscape data. The goal of the task is to localize and identify all audi-
ble birds within the provided soundscape test set. This paper describes
the methodology of the conducted evaluation as well as the synthesis of
the main results and lessons learned.

Keywords: LifeCLEF, bird, song, call, species, retrieval, audio, collection, iden-
tiﬁcation, ﬁne-grained classiﬁcation, evaluation, benchmark, bioacoustics, eco-
logical monitoring

1

Introduction

Accurate knowledge of the identity, the geographic distribution and the evolu-
tion of bird species is essential for a sustainable development of humanity as
well as for biodiversity conservation. Monitoring avian populations is one of
the most important approaches to assess ecosystems in terms of conservation
priority—especially in regions with high overall biological diversity which often
face extinction. Acoustic monitoring using Autonomous Recording Units (ARU)

Copyright c(cid:13) 2020 for this paper by its authors. Use permitted under Creative Com-
mons License Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY 4.0). CLEF 2020, 22-25 Septem-
ber 2020, Thessaloniki, Greece.

allows researchers to conduct point counts in almost any densely vegetated habi-
tat over longer periods of time and has become a widely used sampling tool in
ecological research and monitoring over the past decade [28].

While automated assessment of soundscapes in the hyper-diverse tropics
presents signiﬁcant challenges relative to less diverse systems, it also presents
higher upside. The tropics harbor a hugely disproportionate percentage of Earth’s
biodiversity, more than three-quarters of all species and over 90% of the planet’s
terrestrial birds, and international biodiversity targets will be impossible to meet
if these systems are not conserved [4]. Despite their critical importance, however,
the tropics are widely neglected in biodiversity and ecosystem function litera-
ture [36], and conclusions from studies in temperate regions are often wrongly
used as the basis for assumptions about tropical systems where they do not ap-
ply [6]. The avian species richness in regions like the Amazon is so high that
conducting reliable avian surveys in the Amazon is too overwhelming for most
ﬁeld observers, particularly when combined with the logistical challenges and
poor viewing conditions typical of dense tropical forests [25]. Biased research
priorities and diﬃculties with ﬁeld surveys in the tropics have led to overlooked
biodiversity losses [31] and ﬂawed baseline species occurrence data [5], which
introduce signiﬁcant problems for assessing biodiversity change. ARUs, a cost-
eﬀective way of collecting data in systems that are diﬃcult to access and survey,
are well suited to address many of these issues by generating detailed data that
can be recorded simultaneously, stored permanently, reviewed by multiple ob-
servers, and that is far less impacted by open or closed habitats than point
counts, which can lead to the relative overestimation of species richness and
abundance at sites with more favorable viewing conditions [8].

The improvement of automated assessment systems has the potential to have
a transformative impact on global biodiversity monitoring, at a scale and level
of detail that is impossible with manual annotation or other more traditional
methods. Building automated assessment programs that can handle the unique
challenges of hyper-diverse tropical ecosystems must become a central priority
for conservation organizations and research groups with an interest in protecting
Earth’s biodiversity.

2 BirdCLEF 2020 challenge description

The high amount of eﬀort required to manually analyse recorded soundscapes
means that fully analyzing large datasets is prohibitively time-intensive, neutral-
izing many of the advantages provided by continuous recording across multiple
sites. The LifeCLEF Bird Recognition Challenge (BirdCLEF) focuses on the
development of reliable detection systems for avian vocalizations in continuous
soundscape data. Launched in 2014, it has become the largest bird sound recog-
nition competition in terms of dataset size and species diversity with multiple
tens of thousands of recordings covering up to 1,500 species [12,14].

2.1 Goal and evaluation protocol

The goal of the evaluated task is to localize and identify all audible birds within
the provided soundscape test set. Each soundscape is divided into segments of 5
seconds, and a list of species associated to probability scores has to be returned
for each segment. The used evaluation metric is the classiﬁcation mean Average
Precision (cmAP ), considering each class c of the ground truth as a query. This
means that for each class c, all predictions with ClassId = c are extracted
from the run ﬁle and ranked by decreasing probability in order to compute the
average precision for that class. The mean across all classes is computed as the
main evaluation metric. More formally:

cmAP =

(cid:80)C

c=1 AveP (c)
C

where C is the number of classes (species) in the ground truth and AveP (c) is
the average precision for a given species c computed as:

AveP (c) =

(cid:80)nc

k=1 P (k) × rel(k)
nrel(c)

.

where k is the rank of an item in the list of the predicted segments containing c,
nc is the total number of predicted segments containing c, P (k) is the precision
at cut-oﬀ k in the list, rel(k) is an indicator function equaling 1 if the segment
at rank k is a relevant one (i.e. is labeled as containing c in the ground truth)
and nrel(c) is the total number of relevant segments for class c.

2.2 Dataset

The 2020 BirdCLEF challenge featured the largest, fully-annotated collection of
soundscape recordings from four diﬀerent recording locations : in Peru, Germany
and two in USA. With respect to real-world use cases, labels and metrics were
chosen to reﬂect the vast diversity of bird vocalizations and high ambient noise
levels in omnidirectional recordings.

Training data: Deploying a bird sound recognition system to a new record-
ing and observation site requires classiﬁers that generalize well across diﬀerent
acoustic domains. Focal recordings of bird species from around the world form
an excellent base to develop such a detection system. However, the lack of anno-
tated soundscape data for a new deployment site poses a signiﬁcant challenge. As
in previous editions, training data was provided by the Xeno-canto community
1 and consisted of more than 70,000 recordings covering 960 species from three
continents (South and North America and Europe). Participants were allowed
to use this and other (meta) data to develop their systems. A representative
validation dataset with two hours of soundscape data was also provided, but
participants were not allowed to use this data for training—detection systems
had to be trained on focal recordings only.

1 https://www.xeno-canto.org

(a) PER recording habitat

(b) HSN recording habitat

(c) SSW recording habitat

(d) GER recording habitat

Fig. 1: Test data recording locations. ARU were used to collect audio data of
targeted ecosystems at a large scale. Photos: W. A. Hopping, Mary Clapp, Brian
Maley, Hendrik Reers.

Test data: In addition to the 2019 test data [14], soundscapes from three other
recording sites were added in the 2020 edition of BirdCLEF. All audio data
were collected with passive acoustic recorders from deployments in Germany
(GER), Peru (PER), the High Sierra Nevada (HSN) of California-USA, and the
Sapsucker Woods area (SSW) in New York-USA (locations are illustrated Fig.
1). In an attempt to lower the entry level of this challenge, the total amount of
soundscape data was reduced to 153 recordings with a duration of ten minutes
each (25.5 hours total). Expert ornithologists provided annotations for often
extremely dense acoustic scenes with up to 8 species (1.3 on average) vocalizing
at the same time (Fig. 3).

PER - Inkaterra Reserva Amazonica, Peru: This acoustic data was col-
lected at the Inkaterra Reserva Amazonica (henceforth “ITRA”, 12◦32’07.8”S,
69◦02’58.2”W) between January 14 and February 2 2019, during the rainy sea-
son. ITRA is a 2km2 lowland rainforest reserve on the banks of the Madre de
Dios river, approximately 20km east of the frontier town of Puerto Maldonado.

(a) September 15, 2015

(b) September 11, 2018

Fig. 2: Satellite images (from Google Earth) showing active encroachment on
Inkaterra Reserva Amazonica (green).

The reserve consists primarily of seasonally inundated V´arzea forest. The west-
ern Amazon is the most biodiverse terrestrial system on the planet [11], and
is part of the world’s largest remaining intact tropical system [1]. The region’s
extraordinary biodiversity is threatened by accelerating rates of deforestation,
degradation, and fragmentation, which are driven primarily by expanding road
networks, mining, agriculture, and an increasing population [26]. ITRA is ac-
tively threatened by these processes, particularly encroachment from small-scale
agriculture and selective logging, which has occurred illegally within its bound-
aries (Fig. 2). These threats are magniﬁed by the site’s proximity to Puerto
Maldonado, the largest settlement in the region, which can be reached via an
unmarked road that passes within 1km of the reserve.

The acoustic data from this site was collected as part of a study designed
to assess spatio-temporal variation in avian species richness and vocal activity
levels across intact, degraded, and edge forest, and between diﬀerent days at the
same point locations. ITRA is expected to experience permanent changes to its
species composition and richness in coming years, as a result of the accelerating
deforestation, degradation, and fragmentation in the region, as well as climate
change [4]. Similar processes, including the extirpation of certain species, have
been documented in forest fragments in other parts of the Amazon [33]. The
impending changes to ITRA’s soundscape mean that high-quality historic bioa-
coustic data is likely to be of particular value for future comparative studies,
including those concerning primates, bats, katydids, and other non-avian taxa.
Accordingly, collecting this data for archival reasons was an important incentive
for the project.

Ten SWIFT recording units, provided by the Center for Conservation Bioa-
coustics at the Cornell Lab. of Ornithology2, were placed at separate sites span-

2 https://www.birds.cornell.edu/ccb/

Fig. 3: Example of an annotated soundscape recording. South American sound-
scapes often have an extremely high call density. The 2020 BirdCLEF test data
contains 48 fully annotated soundscapes recorded in Peru.

ning edge habitat, degraded forest, and intact forest within the reserve. These
omnidirectional recorders were set to record continuously for the duration of
their deployment, with a sampling rate of 48kHz, and a gain setting of 35dB.
Sites were separated by approximately 350m to limit the chance of overlapping
detection, and to ensure independence between sites [24]. Recorders were placed
at a consistent height of approximately 1.5m above the ground. To minimize
background noise, all sites used for data analysis were located at a minimum
distance of 450m from the river.

A total of 21 dawn-hours, from 05:00-06:00 PET (10:00-11:00 UTC), repre-
senting 7 of the 10 sites on three randomly-selected dates, were manually an-
notated. Many neotropical bird species sing almost exclusively during the dawn
hour [22], so this time window was selected to maximize the number of species
present in the recordings. Roughly 20,000 individual bounding box annotations,
representing 123 foreground species, were made for all audible bird vocalizations
(Fig. 3). Annotations were particularly focused on vocalizations at frequencies
below 5kHz, which were less likely to overlap with insect noise. Because these
annotations included varying numbers of unidentiﬁed vocalizations, 9 of the 21
total dawn-hours, with the highest quality annotations and lowest share of un-
known vocalizations, were used for BirdCLEF 2020. These 9 recordings featured
6,399 foreground annotations, 1.6% of which were unidentiﬁed, and 4.6% of
which were either unidentiﬁed or grouped with other vocalizations of the same
type, but were not connected to a known species or taxa.

HSN - Sierra Nevada/High Sierra, CA, USA: The recordings were made
in Sequoia and Kings Canyon National Parks, two contiguous national parks
on the southern end of the Sierra Nevada mountain range in California, USA.
Ninety-six percent of the Parks’ 865,964 acres is federally designated wilderness,
which aﬀords the highest level of protection to the land from human develop-

ment. The Parks’ boundary spans several biomes, from mid-elevation chaparral
and conifer and Sequoia forest to alpine tundra and includes the highest peak
in the lower 48 states, Mount Whitney/Tumanguya3.

The focus of the acoustic study was the high-elevation region of the Parks;
speciﬁcally, the headwater lake basins above 3km in elevation. These lake basins
are comprised primarily of perennial graminoid vegetation (wet grasses and
forbs), sparse evergreen woodland (foxtail and whitebark pine), riparian scrub
(primarily willow/Salix sp.), and talus or boulderﬁeld (Fig. 1). The avian commu-
nity becomes less speciose above timberline due to decreased overall productivity
compared to lowland and montane zones [29]. Alpine areas are highly seasonal,
covered in deep snowpack for roughly half the year.

The original intent of the study was to monitor seasonal activity of birds and
bats at lakes containing trout and lakes without trout. Recreational trout stock-
ing in the historically ﬁshless lakes of the Sierra Nevada began in the late 1800’s,
and though it was phased out in the National Parks in the 1970’s and banned
altogether in 1991, self-sustaining populations of trout persist in roughly 50%
of the High Sierra’s historically ﬁshless watershed [16]. The disruptive eﬀects
of introduced trout within the aquatic system are well-studied: the diversity,
distribution and abundance of many native aquatic fauna are vastly reduced in
lakes containing trout [17,20]. However, the cascading impacts of trout on the
adjacent terrestrial zone remain poorly understood, despite the importance of
aquatic-terrestrial subsidies in the food web dynamics of many ecological sys-
tems [23,32].

Additional support for this project from the Parks was due to the fact that
high-elevation areas are particularly vulnerable to climate change: range contrac-
tions for alpine specialists and drastic turnover to the composition of alpine com-
munities are predicted due to changes in temperature and precipitation regimes
linked to global climate change [18]. Most importantly, these changes are likely to
happen heterogeneously across taxa as species distributions shift over both space
and time to track their thermal niches, changing food supply, and/or habitat
structures [34,2,30], making conservation decisions nuanced and diﬃcult. High-
quality data with large-scale replicability on the occurrence and distribution of
alpine species is a pressing need for understanding extinction risk and conserv-
ing biodiversity as the climate changes. However, data collection in wilderness
is limited by diﬃculty in accessibility: in the absence of roads, researchers must

3 The United States government designated the land now known as Sequoia as a
National Park in 1890, and what is now known as Kings Canyon was designated
in 1940. Prior to their forced removal and relocation to reservations in surrounding
areas, the land throughout the current Park boundary was inhabited and tended by
the Me-wuk and Monache people, and the High Sierra in particular was traversed
by the Me-wuk, Monache, Yokut, Western Mono Waksachi, and potentially other
unrecognized tribes.

travel on foot for several kilometers simply to reach these remote alpine loca-
tions. Passive acoustic recorders are a promising tool to collect such data because
they can be deployed at multiple locations, generate a permanent and unbiased
record of vocal animal activity, and can be used into the future as both research
needs and analytical technologies evolve [28].

Soundscapes were recorded for 24h continuously at 10 lakes (5 ﬁshless, 5 ﬁsh-
containing) throughout Sequoia and Kings Canyon National Parks during June-
September 2015. Pilot data were collected at a subset of these lakes during the
same months in 2014. SongMeter SM2+ units (Wildlife Acoustics, USA) powered
by custom-made solar panels were used to obviate the need to swap batteries,
due to the recording locations being extremely diﬃcult to access. SongMeters
recorded mono-channel 16-bits wav ﬁles continuously. This resulted in roughly
6TB of data, which were stored on external hard drives, servers at Cornell Uni-
versity, and backed up in Google Cloud Storage. To create an annotated subset
of data used as evaluation data in the 2020 BirdCLEF challenge, 50 10-minute
segments of audio between 9 and 12 July, 2015 from morning hours (05:10-09:10
PDT) from all 10 sites were selected at random. One expert annotated this
subset: using RavenPro 1.5, a selection box was placed around each sound and
annotated it to species. Every sound that could not be conﬁdently assigned an
identity was reviewed with 1-2 other experts in bird identiﬁcation. When con-
sensus on ID could not be reached, the sound was marked as “unknown.” To
minimize observer bias, all identifying information about the location, date and
time of the recordings was hidden. We used high-quality sound-cancelling head-
phones to minimize variation in the ambient environment that would interfere
with hearing. We observed that it was diﬃcult to reliably identify sounds with
an absolute maximum amplitude less than 40dB; therefore, we only annotated
sounds that exceeded this amplitude.

SSW - Sapsucker Woods, Ithaca, NY, USA: As part of the Sapsucker
Woods Acoustic Monitoring Project (SWAMP), the Center for Conservation
Bioacoustics at the Cornell Lab of Ornithology deployed 30 in-house developed
acoustic recorders (called SWIFT) to the surrounding area. Each of the units
records acoustic data at 48kHz sampling rate covering the frequency of all bird
calls occurring in Sapsucker Woods. The ongoing study aims at investigating the
vocal activity and diversity of local bird species as well as the impact of noise pol-
lution (the local airport and highway 13 are in close proximity) on the behaviour
of birds—especially focusing on changes in vocal output as anthropogenic sounds
may alter the way that birds communicate. Over the past four years, more than
1 million hours of soundscape data have been recorded and stored. This amount
of data is only fully accessible through automated analysis by using reliable de-
tection systems that are robust against unforeseen environmental sounds and
cope well with overlapping vocalizations. In 2018, expert birders annotated 20
complete days of audio data that were recorded between January and June of
2017 and provided almost 80,000 labels across randomly selected recordings (24

out of 30 recording sites per day with one hour per site). The 2019 edition of
BirdCLEF used twelve of these days as test and three as validation data. This
year, we limited the amount of test data to 48 10-minute recordings that also in-
clude previously unreleased audio from this deployment. This reduction became
necessary to balance the test data and to reduce the bias towards one dataset.
Six randomly selected recordings were provided as validation data to allow par-
ticipants to ﬁne-tune their systems. However, we chose to only release validation
data for the SSW and PER dataset which forced participants to develop generic
approaches that are location-independent.

GER - Laubach, Hesse, Germany: Forests, the habitat of woodpeckers,
owls and other bird species, are increasingly being used as locations for wind
farms in the wake of the transformation of energy production. Noise, movement
or scenery eﬀects could have a disturbing impact on these forest bird species and
lead to the avoidance of forest areas near wind farms. Using automated acoustic
recorders, this study aimed to investigate whether wind farms lead to a change
in the use of forest habitats by selected bird species. In order to produce reliable
and objectively recorded data in suﬃcient quantities to be able to investigate
relatively small eﬀects, passive acoustic monitoring is extremely valuable and
above all cost-eﬀective, which is what makes this kind of study possible in the
ﬁrst place. On the other hand, acoustic monitoring is also suitable for the detec-
tion and monitoring of rare, endangered or particularly sensitive animals, which
could not be monitored by human observers. Yet, only automatic processing of
the recordings allows us to handle such data quantities.

Over the course of two seasons (March to June 2019 and 2020), 100 solar-
powered passive recorders (based on a Raspberry Pi 3 A+ with USB soundcard
and mono microphone) were deployed across 11 wind parks with close-proximity
forest (Fig. 1). Each device started to record for two hours around sunrise (one
before, one after) and one hour after sunset. The entire data collection comprised
25,000 hours of audio data. We randomly selected 9 soundscapes with a duration
of 10 minutes each and annotated all audible bird vocalizations using Audacity.
The selection included dawn chorus recordings as well as dusk and night-time
soundscapes with low or no bird activity adding to the overall diversity of this
year’s test data.

3 Results

A total of 69 participants registered for the BirdCLEF 2020 challenge and down-
loaded the dataset. Four teams succeeded in submitting runs, Fig. 4 shows in-
dividual scores achieved by each team sorted by rank in 2020. Details of the
methods and systems used in the runs are synthesized in this overview and
further developed in the individual working notes of the participants. Most sub-
mitted runs scored best for the High Sierra data which has the lowest call density
of all subsets (0.48 species per 5-second interval, best cmAP=0.33). The GER

Fig. 4: Scores achieved by all systems evaluated within the bird identiﬁcation
task of LifeCLEF 2020.

subset has the second highest vocal density and medium score (1.77 species per
5-second interval, best cmAP=0.21), scores for SSW are signiﬁcantly lower in
most runs (0.73 species per 5-second interval, best cmAP=0.18). All teams strug-
gled with the Peruvian soundscape dataset that has a signiﬁcantly higher species
diversity which appears to pose a signiﬁcant challenge (2.05 species per 5-second
interval, best cmAP=0.07). Interestingly, the two ﬁrst competitions on another
Peruvian high-density soundscape dataset demonstrated the same trends (best
cmAP=0.08 at BirdCLEF2017 [10], best cmAP=0.12 at BirdCLEF2018 [9]).
However, it appears that a high vocal activity alone does not suﬃce to predict
how well a recognition system will perform. In contrast to the PER data, GER
audio recordings contain species that vocalize frequently over longer periods of
time which helps classiﬁers to identify them eventually. A high species diversity
and only occasionally vocalizing species seem to prevent recognition systems
from achieving higher cmAP scores.

3.1 Aimarburg [21], Best run overall

Due to the restrictions of the training data, this team decided to implement a
network architecture search (NAS) to cope with the diversity of the classiﬁcation
task. The authors argue that an optimal network architecture is vital when
the use of pre-trained networks is prohibited. The authors use pre-selected 5-
second audio snippets from the training data as input of the neural network.
Each segment was analyzed for the presence of bird sounds using the heuristic
developed for the 2018 baseline system [15]. A number of augmentations were
applied to the data before passing it to the ﬁrst layer of the network—a 1-D
convolution acting as Gabor wavelet transformation. The remaining layers of

the network were established by performing the NAS with a restricted search
space (i.e., speciﬁc layer types and operations) and an evolutionary algorithm. A
number of output heads based on recurrent layers conclude the network topology.
Species lists for each recording location of the test data were used to ﬁlter the
detections. The best scoring run submitted by this team achieved a cmAP of
0.128 and a rmAP of 0.193 thus being the best overall result.

3.2 NPU-BAI [3]

This team implemented a more traditional approach building on the results of
previous editions of BirdCLEF. The participants decided to base their classi-
ﬁer architecture on the Xception neural network—an advanced version of the
Inception-v3 model which performed well in the past years [27,19]. Again, pre-
processed spectrograms were used as input for the network and a number of
augmentations were applied to the input samples. Most notably, mixup train-
ing is used to simulate multiple birds vocalizing by overlaying samples of focal
recordings. This method led to a signiﬁcant improvement compared to other tri-
als and can be considered the most important addition to the training regime.
This observation is backed by other attempts in the same domain [13]. This
team managed to achieve a cmAP of 0.042 and rmAP of 0.067 with their best
submission.

3.3 Thailsson Clementino [7]

Triplet loss has been shown to perform well in diﬀerent classiﬁcation scenarios
[35] and focusing on similarities instead of categories can help to cope with lim-
ited amounts of training data (which is the case for many South American bird
species). This team decided to implement a Siamese network with triplet loss to
generate unique features for each bird vocalization from input mel spectrograms.
A kNN classiﬁer with Euclidean distance and a multilayer perceptron acted as
classiﬁcation instances based on extracted feature embeddings. An AlexNet-like
architecture with 5 convolutional and 3 dense layers was used to train the feature
extractor that provided the best features and thus the best scoring submission.
The participants achieved a cmAP of 0.063 and a rmAP of 0.108 with their (un-
oﬃcial) post-deadline submission. In their working note, the authors argue that
data augmentation and other variations of the triplet loss might help to improve
the performance of this attempt.

4 Conclusion

Passive acoustic monitoring is an important sampling tool for habitat assessments—
especially for highly endangered environments with often extraordinarily high
biodiversity. Despite the fact that automated tools for analyzing soundscape
recordings are far from perfect, the manual examination and annotation of ﬁeld
recordings is extremely labor-intensive and often negates the beneﬁts of acoustic

monitoring compared to human point counts. Habitat loss and the destruction
of critical environmental niches pose a serious threat to many species, and biodi-
versity assessments may only be possible for archived records of long destroyed
areas. The annual BirdCLEF sound recognition challenge is the largest evalua-
tion campaign that speciﬁcally aims at developing state-of-the-art classiﬁers to
help researchers to cope with conservation challenges of our time. Deep neural
networks provide good overall baselines in many domains and adapting archi-
tectures and training regimes to suit the domain of acoustic event recognition
will be a major focal point of future editions. Bird sounds are an extremely di-
verse class of acoustic events and entering this domain has become increasingly
challenging for new participants of BirdCLEF. We will strive to further lower
this barrier to allow more teams to develop and test their ideas so that they can
contribute to this high-impact ﬁeld of research.

Acknowledgements: The organization of the BirdCLEF task is supported
by the Xeno-canto Foundation, the European Union and the European Social
Fund (ESF) for Germany, Jake Holshuh (Cornell class of ’69), the Arthur Vin-
ing Davis Foundations, as well as by the French CNRS projects SABIOD.ORG,
SEAMED, EADM GDR MADICS, BIOSA STIC-AmSud, ANR-18-CE40-0014
SMILES and ANR-20-CHIA-0014 ADSIL. We want to thank all expert birders
who helped to annotate SSW soundscapes with incredible eﬀort: Cullen Hanks,
Jay McGowan, Matt Young, Randy Little, and Sarah Dzielski. We would also
like to thank OekoFor for providing soundscapes and annotations for the GER
dataset, which was funded by the German Federal Agency for Nature Conserva-
tion.

Note: The challenge is open for post-deadline submissions at aicrowd.com
and the data will be available for further download and use. Please do not hesi-
tate to contact the organizers if you have any questions or would like to use the
data to evaluate your system.

https://www.aicrowd.com/challenges/lifeclef-2020-bird-monophone

References

1. Allan, J.R., Venter, O., Watson, J.E.: Temporally inter-comparable maps of ter-

restrial wilderness and the last of the wild. Scientiﬁc data 4, 170187 (2017)

2. Auer, S.K., King, D.I.: Ecological and life-history traits explain recent boundary
shifts in elevation and latitude of western n orth a merican songbirds. Global
Ecology and Biogeography 23(8), 867–875 (2014)

3. Bai, J., Chen, C., Chen, J.: Xception based system for bird sound detection. In:
CLEF working notes 2020, CLEF: Conference and Labs of the Evaluation Forum,
Sep. 2020, Thessaloniki, Greece. (2020)

4. Barlow, J., Fran¸ca, F., Gardner, T.A., Hicks, C.C., Lennox, G.D., Berenguer, E.,
Castello, L., Economo, E.P., Ferreira, J., Gu´enard, B., et al.: The future of hyper-
diverse tropical ecosystems. Nature 559(7715), 517–526 (2018)

5. Boakes, E.H., McGowan, P.J., Fuller, R.A., Chang-qing, D., Clark, N.E., O’Connor,
K., Mace, G.M.: Distorted views of biodiversity: spatial and temporal bias in
species occurrence data. PLoS Biol 8(6), e1000385 (2010)

6. Clarke, D.A., York, P.H., Rasheed, M.A., Northﬁeld, T.D.: Does biodiversity–
ecosystem function literature neglect tropical ecosystems? Trends in ecology &
evolution 32(5), 320–323 (2017)

7. Clementino, T., Colonna, J.G.: Using triplet loss to bird species recognition on
birdclef 2020. In: CLEF working notes 2020, CLEF: Conference and Labs of the
Evaluation Forum, Sep. 2020, Thessaloniki, Greece. (2020)

8. Darras, K., Bat´ary, P., Furnas, B., Celis-Murillo, A., Van Wilgenburg, S.L.,
Mulyani, Y.A., Tscharntke, T.: Comparing the sampling performance of sound
recorders versus point counts in bird surveys: A meta-analysis. Journal of applied
ecology 55(6), 2575–2586 (2018)

9. Go¨eau, H., Glotin, H., Vellinga, W.P., Planqu´e, R., Joly, A.: LifeCLEF Bird
Identiﬁcation Task 2017. In: CLEF: Conference and Labs of the Evaluation Fo-
rum. vol. CEUR Workshop Proceedings. Dublin, Ireland (Sep 2017), https:
//hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-01629175

10. Go¨eau, H., Kahl, S., Glotin, H., Planqu´e, R., Vellinga, W.P., Joly, A.: Overview of
BirdCLEF 2018: monospecies vs. soundscape bird identiﬁcation. In: CLEF: Con-
ference and Labs of the Evaluation Forum. vol. CEUR Workshops Proceedings.
Avignon, France (Sep 2018), https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-02189229
11. Jenkins, C.N., Pimm, S.L., Joppa, L.N.: Global patterns of terrestrial vertebrate di-
versity and conservation. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 110(28),
E2602–E2610 (2013)

12. Joly, A., Go¨eau, H., Kahl, S., Deneu, B., Servajean, M., Cole, E., Picek, L., Ruiz
De Casta˜neda, R., ´e, Lorieul, T., Botella, C., Glotin, H., Champ, J., Vellinga,
W.P., St¨oter, F.R., Dorso, A., Bonnet, P., Eggel, I., M¨uller, H.: Overview of lifeclef
2020: a system-oriented evaluation of automated species identiﬁcation and species
distribution prediction. In: Proceedings of CLEF 2020, CLEF: Conference and
Labs of the Evaluation Forum, Sep. 2020, Thessaloniki, Greece. (2020)

13. Kahl, S.: Identifying Birds by Sound: Large-scale Acoustic Event Recognition
for Avian Activity Monitoring. Ph.D. thesis, Chemnitz University of Technology
(2019)

14. Kahl, S., St¨oter, F.R., Glotin, H., Planqu´e, R., Vellinga, W.P., Joly, A.: Overview of
birdclef 2019: Large-scale bird recognition in soundscapes. In: CLEF working notes
2019, CLEF: Conference and Labs of the Evaluation Forum, Sep. 2019, Lugano,
Switzerland. (2019)

15. Kahl, S., Wilhelm-Stein, T., Klinck, H., Kowerko, D., Eibl, M.: Recognizing birds
from sound - the 2018 birdclef baseline system. arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.07177
(2018)

16. Knapp, R.A.: Non-native trout in natural lakes of the sierra nevada: an analysis of
their distribution and impacts on native aquatic biota. In: Sierra Nevada ecosys-
tem project: ﬁnal report to Congress. vol. 3, pp. 363–407. Centers for Water and
Wildland Resources (1996)

17. Knapp, R.A., Matthews, K.R., Sarnelle, O.: Resistance and resilience of alpine lake

fauna to ﬁsh introductions. Ecological monographs 71(3), 401–421 (2001)

18. La Sorte, F.A., Jetz, W.: Projected range contractions of montane biodiversity
under global warming. Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences
277(1699), 3401–3410 (2010)

19. Lasseck, M.: Bird species identiﬁcation in soundscapes. In: CLEF working notes

2019 (2019)

20. Matthews, K.R., Knapp, R.A., Pope, K.L.: Garter snake distributions in high-
elevation aquatic ecosystems: is there a link with declining amphibian populations
and nonnative trout introductions? Journal of herpetology pp. 16–22 (2002)
21. M¨uhling, M., Franz, J., Korfhage, N., Freisleben, B.: Bird species recognition via
neural architecture search. In: CLEF Working Notes 2020, CLEF: Conference and
Labs of the Evaluation Forum, Sep. 2020, Thessaloniki, Greece. (2020)

22. Parker, Theodore A., I.: On the Use of Tape Recorders in Avifaunal Surveys. The
Auk 108(2), 443–444 (04 1991), https://doi.org/10.1093/auk/108.2.443
23. Polis, G.A., Anderson, W.B., Holt, R.D.: Toward an integration of landscape and
food web ecology: the dynamics of spatially subsidized food webs. Annual review
of ecology and systematics 28(1), 289–316 (1997)

24. Ralph, C.J., Droege, S., Sauer, J.R.: Monitoring bird populations by point counts,
vol. 149, chap. Managing and monitoring birds using point counts: Standards and
applications, pp. 161–168. US Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Paciﬁc
Southwest Research Station (1995)

25. Robinson, W.D., Lees, A.C., Blake, J.G.: Surveying tropical birds is much harder
than you think: a primer of best practices. Biotropica 50(6), 846–849 (2018)
26. S´anchez-Cuervo, A.M., de Lima, L.S., Dallmeier, F., Garate, P., Bravo, A., Van-
thomme, H.: Twenty years of land cover change in the southeastern peruvian ama-
zon: implications for biodiversity conservation. Regional Environmental Change
20(1), 8 (2020)

27. Sevilla, A., Glotin, H.: Audio bird classiﬁcation with inception v4 joint to an at-
tention mechanism. In: Working Notes of CLEF 2017 (Cross Language Evaluation
Forum) (2017)

28. Shonﬁeld, J., Bayne, E.: Autonomous recording units in avian ecological research:
Current use and future applications. Avian Conservation and Ecology 12(1) (2017)
29. Siegel, R., Wilkerson, R., Saracco, J., Steel, Z.: Elevation ranges of birds on the

sierra nevada’s west slope. Western Birds 42(1), 2–26 (2011)

30. Socolar, J.B., Epanchin, P.N., Beissinger, S.R., Tingley, M.W.: Phenological shifts
conserve thermal niches in north american birds and reshape expectations for
climate-driven range shifts. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
114(49), 12976–12981 (2017)

31. Socolar, J.B., Valderrama Sandoval, E.H., Wilcove, D.S.: Overlooked biodiversity
loss in tropical smallholder agriculture. Conservation Biology 33(6), 1338–1349
(2019)

32. Soininen, J., Bartels, P., Heino, J., Luoto, M., Hillebrand, H.: Toward more in-
tegrated ecosystem research in aquatic and terrestrial environments. BioScience
65(2), 174–182 (2015)

33. Stouﬀer, P.C.: Birds in fragmented amazonian rainforest: Lessons from 40 years at

the biological dynamics of forest fragments project. The Condor (2020)

34. Tingley, M.W., Beissinger, S.R.: Cryptic loss of montane avian richness and high

community turnover over 100 years. Ecology 94(3), 598–609 (2013)

35. Weinberger, K.Q., Saul, L.K.: Distance metric learning for large margin nearest

neighbor classiﬁcation. Journal of Machine Learning Research 10(2) (2009)

36. Wilson, K.A., Auerbach, N.A., Sam, K., Magini, A.G., Moss, A.S.L., Langhans,
S.D., Budiharta, S., Terzano, D., Meijaard, E.: Conservation research is not hap-
pening where it is most needed. PLoS Biology 14(3), e1002413 (2016)

