Bioinformatics modelling and metabolic engineering of
the branched chain amino acid pathway for specific
production of mycosubtilin isoforms in Bacillus subtilis
Jean-Sébastien Guez, Françoise Coucheney, Joany Guy, Max Béchet, Pierre

Fontanille, Nour-Eddine Chihib, Joachim Niehren, François Coutte, Philippe

Jacques

To cite this version:

Jean-Sébastien Guez, Françoise Coucheney, Joany Guy, Max Béchet, Pierre Fontanille, et al.. Bioin-
formatics modelling and metabolic engineering of the branched chain amino acid pathway for spe-
cific production of mycosubtilin isoforms in Bacillus subtilis. Metabolites, 2022, 12 (2), pp.107.
￿10.3390/metabo12020107￿. ￿hal-03498125￿

HAL Id: hal-03498125

https://inria.hal.science/hal-03498125

Submitted on 21 Jan 2022

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

Article
Bioinformatics  Modelling  and  Metabolic  Engineering  of  the 
Branched  Chain  Amino  Acid  Pathway  for  Speciﬁc  Production  of 
Mycosubtilin Isoforms in Bacillus subtilis

Jean-Sébastien Guez 1, Françoise Coucheney 2, Joany Guy 2, Max Béchet 2, Pierre Fontanille 1,  
Nour-Eddine Chihib 3, Joachim Niehren 4,5, François Coutte 2,* and Philippe Jacques 6

1 Université Clermont Auvergne, Clermont Auvergne INP, CNRS, Institut Pascal, F-63000 Clermont-Ferrand, France; j-

sebastien.guez@uca.fr (J.-S.G.); pierre.fontanille@uca.fr (P.F.)

2 Université de Lille, UMRt BioEcoAgro 1158-INRAE, Équipe Métabolites  

Secondaires  D’origine  Microbienne,  Institut  Charles  Viollette,  F-59000  Lille,  France;  francoise.coucheney@univ-
lille.fr (F.C.); guy.joany@gmail.com (J.G.); max.bechet@univ-lille.fr (M.B.) ; (F.C.) francois.coutte@univ-lille.fr

3 Université de Lille, UMR 8207–UMET–Unité Matériaux et Transformations, CNRS, INRAE, Centrale Lille, F-59000 

Lille, France; (N.-E.C.) nour-eddine.chihib@univ-lille.fr

4 Université de Lille, CRIStAL, Centre de Recherche en Informatique, Signal et Automatique de Lille,  
Biocomputing Team, UMR CNRS 9189, F-59000 Lille, France; (J.N.) joachim.niehren@univ-lille.fr
INRIA, Université de Lille, F-59000 Lille, France

5

6 Université de Liège, UMRt BioEcoAgro 1158-INRAE, Équipe  

Métabolites  Spécialisés  D’origine  Microbienne,  TERRA  Teaching  and  Research  Centre,  MiPI,  Gembloux Agro-Bio 
Tech, B-5030 Gembloux, Belgium; (P.J.) philippe.jacques@uliege.be
* Correspondence: francois.coutte@univ-lille.fr; Tel.: +33-(0)-328767497

Abstract:  Mycosubtilin  belongs  to  the  family  of  lipopeptides.  Different  isoforms  with  various  antifungal 
activities can be obtained according to the length and the isomery of the fatty acid. In this work, the activi-
ties  of  the  mycosubtilin  isoforms  were  ﬁrst  studied  against  the  pathogen  Aspergillus  niger,  revealing  the 
high activity of the anteiso-C17 isoform. Modiﬁcation of the mycosubtilin isoform patterns during cultures 
of the natural strain Bacillus subtilis ATCC 6633 was then investigated through amino acid feeding experi-
ments. In parallel, single-gene knockouts and single-gene overexpression, leading to the overproduction of 
the  anteiso-C15  fatty  acid  chains,  were  predicted  using  informatics  tools  which  provide  logical  reasoning 
with formal models of reaction networks. In this way, it was in silico predicted that the single overexpression 
of the ilvA gene as well as the single knockout of the codY gene may lead to the overproduction of anteiso-
C15 fatty acid chains. For the ﬁrst time, it has been demonstrated that overexpression of ilvA helps to en-
hance the furniture of odd anteiso fatty acids leading to a favored mycosubtilin anteiso-C17 production pat-
tern (+41%). Alternatively, a knock-out codY mutant led to a higher furniture of even iso fatty acids, leading 
to a favored mycosubtilin iso-C16 production pattern (+180%). These results showed that increased selec-
tive  synthesis  of  particular  isoforms  of  mycosubtilin  through  metabolic  engineering  is  feasible,  disclosing 
the interest of these approaches for future development of lipopeptide-producing strains.

Keywords:  metabolic  engineering;  bioinformatic  modelling;  lipopeptides;  mycosubtilin;  antifungal;  fatty 
acids; branched chain amino acids; Bacillus subtilis

1. Introduction

Lipopeptides  are  classiﬁed  into  three  families:  surfactins,  fengycins  (or  plipastatins),  and 
iturins [1]. Among all these natural products, mycosubtilin is a hybrid polyketide synthase/nonri-
bosomal  peptide  synthase  (PKS/NRPS)  product  which  belongs  to  the  iturin  family. This  family 
also includes iturin A, AL, and C; bacillomycin D, F, L, and LC; and bacillopeptin [2]. Mycosub-
tilin is a biosurfactant and a strong antifungal agent constituted of a circular lipoheptapeptide with 
a β-amino fatty acid moiety (Figure 1).

Metabolites 2022, 12, x. https://doi.org/10.3390/xxxxx

www.mdpi.com/journal/metabolites

Metabolites 2022, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW

2

 of 

21

Figure 1. Mycosubtilin anteiso-C17.

The combination of different fatty acid lengths, mainly C16 and C17, and multiple isomeries 
(linear,  iso,  and  anteiso)  leads  to  different  mycosubtilin  isoforms,  showing  varying  biological 
activity. Mycosubtilins act as pore-forming agents that activate in situ phospholipases and allow 
entering  and  disrupting  the  lipid  bilayer  by  forming  oligomers.  These  oligomers  consist  of 
lipopeptide clusters, lipopeptide–phospholipids, or phospholipid–sterols complexes [3]. The pores 
formed will gradually expand and then lead to the death of the target cell through the leakage of 
potassium, intracellular nucleotides, proteins, lipids, and polysaccharides [4,5]. The pore-forming 
mycosubtilin  shows  a  wide  antifungal  spectrum  against  Saccharomyces  cerevisiae  [6],  Candida 
albicans,  Yarrowia  lipolytica,  Pichia  pastoris,  Cryptococcus  neoformans  [7],  Candida  krusei, 
Paecilomyces  variotii,  Byssocchlamys  fulva  [8],  Botrytis  cinerea  [9],  Venturia  inaequalis  [10], 
Zymoseptoria tritici [11], and Bremia lactucae [12]. However, all of these studies have been per-
formed with mixtures of mycosubtilin isoforms produced by B. subtilis.

It  has  long  been  known  that  the  composition  of  the  peptide  chain  has  an  inﬂuence  on  the 
antifungal activity of iturins [6,13]. To illustrate the signiﬁcance of the relationship between spe-
ciﬁc primary structures and related biological activities [14], two-dimensional NMR studies were 
performed with mycosubtilin [15] and iturin A [16]. Despite their close-related primary peptidic 
structures which only differ by the inversion of two residues in positions 6 and 7, D-Ser and L-
Asn, these two compounds showed a completely different molecular topology, resulting in differ-
ent levels of biological activity. The impact of both the length of the fatty acid chain and its iso-
mery seems to be even more important than that of the core peptide. Thus, the surfactant activity 
of iturins and the stability of the foam is impacted by the length of the alkyl chain. Increasing the 
chain length (above C15) results in lower bubble stability [17]. The nature of the fatty acid chain 
also plays an important role in the antifungal activity of iturins. A study carried out on the effect 
of  the  chain’s  length  and  the  isomery  of  iturin A  showed  that  the  antifungal  activity  was  even 
higher when the chain was longer [18]. It also appeared that the iturin A linear n-C16 isoform was 
more active than the iso-C16 isoform. Another study on iturins showed that the anteiso-C17 iso-
form of mycosubtilin was the most active against the yeast C. albicans [7]. The activity of differ-
ent alkyl chains of mycosubtilin against B. cinerea was also studied. The minimal inhibitory con-
centration (MIC) of puriﬁed isoforms of mycosubtilin was determined and the results showed that 
the anteiso-C17 isoform was the most active against B. cinerea with a MIC of 8 μM, followed by 
the  isoforms  n-C16  and  iso-C17  (MIC  =  16  μM)  and  iso-C16  (MIC  =  32  μM)  [9].  Moreover, 
bacillomycin L (and Lc) showed that the antifungal activity increased with the length of the alkyl 
chain n-C16 ≥ n-C14 and iso-C16 ≥ iso-C14. Furthermore, in this same study, the authors showed 
that the isomery was also important as n-C16 was more active than iso-C16 [19].

To better understand how B. subtilis produces the different mycosubtilin isoforms, the syn-
thesis  mechanism  of  mycosubtilins,  which  helps  to  incorporate  the  fatty  acid  moiety,  should  be 
highlighted. Mycosubtilin synthesis is accomplished by the mycosubtilin synthetase, a multifunc-

Metabolites 2022, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW

3

 of 

21

tional hybrid type I PK synthetase/NRP synthetase (PKS/NRPS). The operon encoding the myco-
subtilin synthetase has been identiﬁed and sequenced in B. subtilis ATCC 6633 [20]. This operon 
of 38 kb consists of four ORFs: fenF, mycA, mycB, and mycC. The assembly line of the mycosub-
tilin synthetase directs the mycosubtilin formation through a complex thiotemplate modular sys-
tem. Each of the seven NRPS modules of the mycosubtilin synthetase, distributed among MycA, 
MycB, and MycC subunits, are responsible for the incorporation of a single amino acid. MycA 
presents  unique  features  with  combining  functional  fatty-acid-activating  PKS  and  NRPS  mod-
ules. An intra-cellular fatty acid is loaded by an acyl ligase (AL) domain onto acyl carrier protein 
(ACP1). The loading of the acyl by (AL) does not depend on the length of carbon chain when it is 
included between C10 and C16 [21]. Moreover, the lack of speciﬁcity of AL, FenF, and also AMT 
[22]  opens  interesting  combinatorial  biosynthesis  prospects  for  the  development  of  more  active 
analogues [23]. However, no data are available yet on the in vivo speciﬁc loading of ACP1 by AL 
with  natural  iso-  or  anteiso-branched  fatty  acids  of  B.  subtilis. The  synthesis  mechanism  of  the 
different mycosubtilin isoforms could, thus, depend on the intra-cellular fatty acid pool. Particu-
larly, the synthesis of anteiso-branched chain mycosubtilin, which seems to be the most antifun-
gal isoform [7], could depend on the anteiso-branched chain fatty acids pool. 

So  far,  the  branched  chain  fatty  acids  in  bacteria  belonging  to  Bacillus  genus  are  de  novo 
synthesized  [24]  using  the  branched  chain  α-keto  acids  coming  from  valine,  leucine,  and 
isoleucine (Val, Leu, and Ile) as primer sources of even iso, odd iso, odd anteiso fatty acids, and 
malonyl-CoA as the chain extender [25]. B. subtilis possesses branched chain fatty acids of the 
iso  and  anteiso  series  as  major  acyl  constituents  of  cellular  lipids:  odd  anteiso  (43%),  odd  iso 
(29%),  and  even  iso  (15%). The  branched  chain  amino  acids  (Val,  Leu,  and  Ile)  are  biosynthe-
sized by several enzymes encoded by the gene ilvA and those of the ilvB operon using threonine 
and pyruvate as precursors [26,27]. More speciﬁcally, the ilvA gene codes for the threonine dehy-
dratase, which catalyzes the ﬁrst step of the Ile biosynthesis pathway [28]. During the biosynthe-
sis of branched chain fatty acid, these amino acids are ﬁrst degraded to α-keto-3-methylvalerate 
(Keta),  α-ketoisovalerate  (Ketb),  and  α-ketoisocaproate  (Ketc)  by  a  branched  chain  amino  acid 
transaminase (BCAT). These intermediates are then converted to 2-methylbutyryl-CoA (MetBut-
CoA),  isobutyryl-CoA  (IsoButCoA),  and  isovaleryl-CoA  (IsoValCoA),  respectively,  by  the 
branched chain ketoacid dehydrogenase (BCKD) complex. These two groups of enzymes (BCAT 
and BCKD) are encoded by the bkd operon (ptb, bcd, buk, lpdV, bkdAA, bkdAB, and bkdB) [29]. 
This  metabolic  pathway  is  regulated  by  the  three  major  transcriptomic  regulators  of  B.  subtilis, 
CodY (the global regulator), TnrA (the nitrogen regulator), and CcpA (the carbon-activated pro-
tein) [30]. The importance of this metabolic pathway in the production of  Bacillus lipopeptides 
has recently been studied. Coutte et al. (2015) has modelled this metabolic pathway and its regu-
lation  in  order  to  successfully  predict  the  gene  knock-out  for  the  overproduction  of  Leu  and  in 
ﬁne  surfactin  [27].  More  recently,  the  same  team  has  shown  that  by  modifying  the  catabolic 
pathways  of  branched  chain  amino  acids,  and  particularly  by  disrupting  the  lpdV  gene,  a  strain 
derived from B. subtilis 168 preferentially produced n-C14 surfactin [31], while an interruption of 
codY  caused  an  overproduction  of  surfactin  and  particularly  of  the  [Val]7  C14  isoform.  Other 
authors have shown that the inhibition of bkdAA and bkdAB, two genes involved in the degrada-
tion of Leu and Val to fatty acids, not only improved surfactin production, but also increased the 
proportion of C14 isoforms. The mutant strain produced nearly 85% of this isoform compared to 
25% obtained with the parent strain [32]. Regarding the production of iturinic molecules, it has 
been shown, using B. subtilis BD, BL, MS, IT, and NICIB 8872 strains, that supplying the culture 
medium with exogenous Val, Leu, and Ile subsequently orientated the fatty acid synthesis toward 
even iso, odd iso, and odd anteiso fatty acids, and favored the production of even iso, odd iso, and 
odd  anteiso  lipopeptides  [33]. These  elements  infer  that  the  production  pattern  of  mycosubtilin 
isoforms could be modulated by targeting genes that modify the intracellular branched fatty acid 
pool.

In  this  study,  we  ﬁrst  investigated  the  activities  of  the  different  mycosubtilin  isoforms 
against the pathogen Aspergillus niger, revealing the high activity of the anteiso-C17 isoform. As 
branched chain amino acids are primer sources of branched chain fatty acids, we compared then 
the  production  of  mycosubtilin  isoforms  by  B.  subtilis ATCC  6633  with  or  without  exogenous 
branched amino acid feeding. Finally, we developed parallel approaches based on transcriptomic 
studies, as well as bioinformatic modelling and prediction, to identify several target genes which 
could  lead  to  the  production  of  different  patterns  of  mycosubtilin.  Evidence  of  the  role  of  one 

Metabolites 2022, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW

4

 of 

21

chosen target gene in the enhanced furniture of the fatty acid isoform was achieved, leading to a 
favored bioactive mycosubtilin production pattern. 

2. Results

The objectives of this work were ﬁrst to carry out the puriﬁcation of mycosubtilin isoforms 
to investigate their antifungal activity against A. niger, which causes major problems in fruit and 
vegetable crops, particularly in the cultivation of Amaryllidaceae. Once the most active isoform 
was identiﬁed, different overproduction strategies were implemented, such as amino acid feeding, 
gene knock-out, or gene overexpression, to direct the Bacillus’s metabolism through the produc-
tion of this most active isoform.

2.1. Puriﬁcation and Determination of the Antifungal Activity of Mycosubtilin Isoforms

Mycosubtilin isoforms were produced by the B. subtilis BBG100 strain, using the overﬂow-
ing continuous culture (O-CC) process described by Guez et al. (2021) [34]. Figure S1 presents 
the  annotated  chromatogram  obtained  for  a  mixture  of  mycosubtilins  composed  of:  iso-C16 
(26%), Gln3 C17 (1%), n-C16 (2%), anteiso-C17 (45%), and iso-C17 (23%). This mixture was 
used for the chromatographic preparation of each individual mycosubtilin isoform. MICs of the 
mixture and of each puriﬁed isoform were then determined against A. niger, and compared with 
previously obtained results toward various fungi (Table 1).

Table  1.  MIC  determination  of  the  mycosubtilin  mixture  and  mycosubtilin-puriﬁed  isoforms  expressed  in 
µM. Experiments were performed in triplicate.

Pathogens strains Mixture

iso-C16

n-C16

anteiso-C17

iso-C17 Reference

Botrytis cinerea

Aspergillus niger

Candida albicans

8

8

8

32

32

>32

16

16

8

8

8

32

16

16

16

[9]

This work

[7]

Conﬁrming the results previously obtained by authors on the ascomycetes fungi B. cinerea, 
the solution of mycosubtilin had a strong action against A. niger. The minimal inhibitory concen-
trations  of  the  mixture  of  mycosubtilins  and  individual  puriﬁed  mycosubtilin  isoforms  showed 
that the mixture gave an equal effect compared to the individual puriﬁed mycosubtilin isoforms. 
Indeed, the anteiso-C17 mycosubtilin and the mix were the most active against the fungus (MIC 
of 8 µM each), followed by the n-C16 and iso-C17 isoforms (MIC of 16 µM each), as well as the 
iso-C16  one  (MIC  of  32  µM).  The  anteiso-C17  mycosubtilin  seems  signiﬁcantly  less  active 
against C. albicans (32 µM). Taken together, these results show that it could, therefore, be inter-
esting to overproduce this anteiso-C17 isoform speciﬁcally, in order to facilitate the puriﬁcation 
step and the potential future use of this compound as an antifungal agent.

2.2. Effect of Amino Acid Feeding during B. subtilis ATCC 6633 Cultures

2.2.1. Effect on Cellular Fatty Acids Pattern

The proportions of the different fatty acid isoforms were quantiﬁed by gas chromatography 
in  amino-acid-supplemented  conditions  (Figure  2).  The  addition  of  Leu  to  the  culture  medium 
induced  an  increase  in  the  odd  iso  fatty  acids,  such  as  iso-C15,  which  increased  from  8.62  to 
31.59% and iso-C17 which increased from 6.54 to 17.06% compared to the control. The even iso 
fatty acids show an increase, from 13.72 to 34.98% for iso-C16 and 4.16 to 19.26% for iso-C14, 
in the presence of Val. Finally, the addition of Ile leads to an increase in anteiso fatty acids, from 
49.91 to 59.40% for anteiso-C15 and from 13.12 to 33.07% for anteiso-C17.

Metabolites 2022, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW

5

 of 

21

Figure 2. Fatty acid isoforms pattern of B. subtilis ATCC 6633 after 48 h of growth at 30 °C in modiﬁed 
Landy medium buffered at pH 7.0 with MOPS 100 mM and supplied either with Leu, Val, or Ile at 2 g/L. 
Results are mean values and standard deviations of four independent experiments.

2.2.2. Effect on Mycosubtilin Pattern

The mycosubtilin production was measured after 48 h of growth. Mycosubtilin concentra-
tion was above 55.0 ± 10.3 mg/L for the standard condition and was slightly higher for the amino 
acids supplemented conditions: 66.1 ± 5.2 mg/L for Leu, 71.4 ± 5.4 mg/L for Val, and 77.3 ± 7.6 
mg/L for Ile. The growth of B. subtilis ATCC 6633 was comparable under all the used conditions 
(data not shown). Supplementation of the modiﬁed Landy medium with different amino acids had 
an impact on the diverse proportions of mycosubtilins patterns (Figure 3). Branched amino acids 
showed different impacts on isomers production: Val helped to obtain mainly mycosubtilin  iso-
C16, Leu helped to obtain mainly mycosubtilin iso-C17, and Ile led to a highly selective anteiso-
C17 mycosubtilin production pattern.

Figure 3. Mycosubtilin isoforms pattern of B. subtilis ATCC 6633 after 48 h of growth at 30 °C in modiﬁed 
Landy medium buffered at pH 7.0 with MOPS 100 mM and supplied either with Leu, Val, or Ile at 2 g/L. 
Results are mean values and standard deviations of four independent experiments.

The ratio of anteiso on iso fatty acids to mycosubtilin isoforms was calculated. This indicat-
ed the very signiﬁcant effect of the addition of Ile for the biosynthesis of anteiso fatty acid as well 
as its clear impact on the production proﬁles of mycosubtilin. Indeed, the ratio of FA anteiso/iso 
is 19.2 ± 3.4 and the ratio of mycosubtilin anteiso/iso is 12.3 ± 1.4.

Metabolites 2022, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW

6

 of 

21

2.3. Identify Genetic Targets for Speciﬁc Production of Mycosubtilin Isoforms

A main objective of this work was the development of a metabolic engineering-like strategy 
to  direct  the  mycosubtilin  synthesis  selectively  toward  a  chosen  isoform.  To  achieve  this  goal, 
two  parallel  and  complementary  approaches  were  developed.  The  ﬁrst  is  based  on  a  transcrip-
tomics study of B. subtilis BBG100 in the presence or absence of Ile in the medium. The second 
is  based  on  bioinformatics  modelling  of  the  branched  chain  amino  acid  metabolic  pathway  and 
the  use  of  constraint  programming  to  predict  potential  genetic  targets  for  overexpression  or 
knockout, leading to an overproduction of the anteiso-branched chain fatty acid.

2.3.1. Transcriptomic Study

The differential gene expression occurring during an overproduction of the anteiso-C17 my-
cosubtilin compared to a standard mycosubtilin production pattern was studied. As yeast extract 
contains branched amino acids, it was retrieved from the modiﬁed culture medium. Under these 
conditions, a loss of productivity in mycosubtilin was observed by a 20-fold decrease in B. sub-
tilis ATCC 6633 and a 5-fold decrease with its derivative BBG100 (data not shown). The choice 
was,  therefore,  made  to  preferentially  study  B.  subtilis  BBG100  transcriptomic  response  rather 
than a B. subtilis ATCC 6633 one, as B. subtilis BBG100 guarantees a level of mycosubtilin pro-
duction between 10 and 15 times higher than that of ATCC 6633 [35]. The strain BBG100 was 
constructed  from  B.  subtilis ATCC  6633  by  replacing  the  native  promoter  of  the  mycosubtilin 
operon by a strong and constitutive one [35]. Moreover, to intensify the mycosubtilin production, 
the culture medium was buffered with 100 mM MOPS at pH 7.0 [34] and cultures were grown 
under  conditions  of  high  oxygen  limitation  [36].  Finally,  cultures  of  B.  subtilis  BBG100  were 
performed in the culture medium supplemented with 2 g/L of Ile (test) or not (control).

Under  these  experimental  conditions,  the  differential  gene  expression  of  the  mycosubtilin 
overproducing  strain  BBG100  could  be  inspected. A  DNA  oligonucleotide  microarray  analysis 
revealed  differential  level  of  expressions  of  transcripts  involved  in  central  metabolic  pathways 
linked  to  the  selectivity  of  the  anteiso-C17  mycosubtilin  biosynthesis.  Samples  taken  from  cul-
tures for transcriptome studies were collected early in order to gain access to information on ge-
netic regulations occurring early in growth (Figure 4). Data showed that, in the presence of Ile in 
the medium, most of the early regulated gene and overexpressed genes are involved in the meta-
bolic pathway of branched chain amino acid biosynthesis and with a high expression of the ilvB-
HCleuABCD operon. In contrast, the ybgE gene coding for aminotransferase is under-expressed. 
Furthermore,  from  a  regulatory  point  of  view,  the  global  pleiotropic  regulator  codY  is  slightly 
under-expressed during growth in the presence of Ile, whereas abrB is overexpressed.

Figure 4. Microarray results for differential gene expression performed in the culture medium supplemented 
with  2  g/L  of  Ile  (test)  or  not  (control).  p-value  <  0.05:  *;  p-value  <  0.01:  **;  p-value  0.001:  ***;  result 
based on a wrapper-based gene selection technique (bootstrap classiﬁcation combined to variance analysis): 
codY.

2.3.2. Model-Based Prediction for the anteiso Fatty Acid Precursor Overproduction

To  perform  a  bioinformatic  prediction  of  the  overproduction  of  anteiso-C17  mycosubtilin, 
the previously developed model of the branched chain amino acid metabolic pathway was used 
[27].  This  model  was  developed  at  the  time  to  predict  the  genes  knock-out  and  the  changes  in 

Metabolites 2022, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW

7

 of 

21

input  ﬂow  required  for  the  overproduction  of  Leu  (Figure  S2).  In  the  present  work,  this  model 
was improved by taking advantage from the latest developments in the ﬁeld. All the changes and 
simpliﬁcations made are described in detail in paragraph 5.4 of the Materials and Methods sec-
tion. The prediction target of interest for anteiso-C17 mycosubtilin production is to increase the 
outﬂow to anteiso-C15 fatty acid biosynthesis. So, the target is now: anteiso-C15 = !.

Running the version 0.6 of the BioComputing’s reaction network tool with this target on the 
reaction network did not work well the ﬁrst time, for several reasons that are described in detail in 
the Materials and Methods section, which led to the reﬁned feedback network presented in Figure 
S4. Running the BioComputing’s tool again on the reaction network from Figure S4 led to much 
more convincing predictions of reaction knockouts, inﬂow changes, and gene overexpression, as 
described in Figure 5.

Figure 5. New improved model of branched chain amino acid metabolic pathway developed for the over-
production of mycosubtilin anteiso-C17. Constraint was applied on the overproduction of anteiso-branched 
chain  fatty  acid  (anteiso-C15  +  anteiso-C17  =  !)  and  change  predictions  were  visualized.  Modelling  lan-
guage and semantics were ﬁrst described by Coutte et al. (2015) [27], and improvements for this work are 
described in the paragraph 5.4 of the Materials and Methods section. This ﬁgure semantic description was 
extracted  from  Coutte  et  al.  (2015)  [27]  for  better  understanding  of  this  ﬁgure.  Reaction  networks  in  our 
modeling language are represented as graphs similar to Petri nets. The concrete syntax of our reaction net-
works is based on XML, from which the graphs are computed. The XML representation is also the input for 
the prediction algorithm. These graphs contain two kinds of nodes: round nodes for representing its species 
and boxed nodes for representing its reactions. More precisely, any species S is represented by a round node 
.  Solid  edges  either  link  a  reactant  to  its  reaction 
. There are three kinds of dashed edges, which start at 
,  an  activator 
,  and  an  inhibitor  edge  links  an  inhibitor  to  a  reaction 

the  three  kinds  of  modiﬁers. An  accelerator  edge  links  an  accelerator  to  a  reaction 
edge  links  an  activator  to  a  reaction 

  and  any  reaction  with  name  r  by  a  boxed  node 
 or a reaction to one of its products 

. An input edge 

 points from the context to an inﬂow species S, while an outﬂow edge 

points  from  an  outﬂow  species  S  to  the  context.  For  convenience,  we  introduced  the  last  kind  of  edges 
  as  a  shortcut  for  a  product  that  is  degraded  by  a  hidden  reaction,  i.e.,  as  a  shortcut  for 
. Species nodes with three different colors were used, which indicate their biological roles. 

 
Metabolites 2022, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW

8

 of 

21

). There is a 
Yellow indicates metabolites (such as
third  color  for  “artiﬁcial  species”  that  serves  to  modulate  regulation,  such  as  the  promoter  of  the  ilv-leu 

) and blue indicates proteins (such as 

operon 
. Reactions that are potential candidates for knockouts or overexpression will be annotat-
ed  in  orange.  Dark  orange  indicates  candidates  that  were  selected  by  our  knockout  prediction,  while  light 
orange indicates candidates that were not. Genes knockout predictions are represented by ⇓ and gene over-
expression by !.

First predictions are linked to input ﬂows, i.e., an increase in the input ﬂow of Thr and GTP 
is  proposed.  Second  predictions  propose  the  knock-out  of  several  genes,  in  particular  those  in-
volved in reactions r15 (CodY biosynthesis), r16 (TnrA biosynthesis), r46 (YbgE biosynthesis), 
and r47 (YwvA biosynthesis). Last predictions are linked to the overexpression of genes and par-
ticularly for the reactions of r22 (IlvA biosynthesis), r3, r4, r62 (expression of bcd-bkdL operon), 
and r47 (YwvA biosynthesis). Surprisingly, some reactions are predicted in Up and Down; this is 
the case of reactions r15 (CodY biosynthesis) and r46 (Ywva biosynthesis). All these predictions 
are  discussed  below. The  two  criteria  were  followed  to  choose  the  target  genes:  1)  to  choose  a 
reaction directly impacting the metabolic reactions; and 2) to choose of a reaction impacting the 
regulation of these metabolic pathways. Thus, the overexpression of the ilvA gene (r22) and the 
interruption of the codY gene (r15) were undertaken by genetic engineering to verify their impact 
on the production of anteiso fatty acid and mycosubtilin anteiso-C17.

2.4. Genetic Engineering of Predicted Gene Targets

From the above results, several genetic targets were identiﬁed as having a major role in the 
modulation  of  the  production  of  mycosubtilin  isoforms.  The  overexpression  of  ilvA  (BBG133) 
and the knock-out of codY (BV12I37) were performed in the wild-type strain. These strains were 
then cultured at 30 °C in modiﬁed Landy medium for 48 h. The fatty acid isoforms were quanti-
ﬁed by GC and the mycosubtilin concentration, as well as isoforms by HPLC. The strains B. sub-
tilis ATCC 6633 and BBG133 showed similar growths, compared to BV12I37, which was slightly 
lowered (data not shown). The mycosubtilin production measured after 48 h of growth was 55.0 ± 
10.3 mg/L for B. subtilis ATCC 6633, 45.7 ± 1.3 mg/L for BV12I37, and 36.7 ± 18.1 mg/L for 
BBG133. The diverse isoform proportions of fatty acids were quantiﬁed by GC (Figure 6) and the 
mycosubtilin proﬁle was quantiﬁed by HPLC (Figure 7).

s
d
i
c
a
y
,
a
f

f
o
e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
P

)

%

(

s

m
r
o
f
o
s
i

100

75

50

25

0

isoC14 isoC15 aiC15 isoC16 nC16 isoC17 aiC17

Figure  6.  Fatty  acid  isoforms  proﬁles  of  B.  subtilis ATCC  6633  (gray  bar),  BV12I37  (CodY−;  dark  blue 
bar), and BBG133 (IlvA+; light blue bar) after 48 h of growth at 30 °C in the modiﬁed Landy medium. Re-
sults are mean values and standard deviations of two independent experiments.

 
 
 
 
 
Metabolites 2022, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW

9

 of 

21

n

i
l

7
b
u
s
o
c
y
m

f
o
e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
P

)

%

(

s

m
r
o
f
o
s
i

100

80

60

40

20

0

isoC16

nC16

anteisoC17 

isoC17

Figure 7. Patterns of mycosubtilin isoforms of B. subtilis ATCC 6633 (gray bar), BV12I37 (CodY−; dark 
blue bar), and BBG133 (IlvA +; light blue bar) after 48 h of growth at 30 °C in the modiﬁed Landy medium. 
Results are mean values and standard deviations of two independent experiments. 

The membrane fatty acids pattern of the B. subtilis BBG133 performed at 30 °C was widely 
dominated  by  odd-numbered  branched  chains  in  comparison  with  the  proﬁle  of  the  wild-type 
ATCC 6633. The predominant fatty acid was anteiso-C15, whereas the anteiso-C17 and the iso-
C16  were,  respectively,  the  second  and  third  common  fatty  acids.  The  main  changes  were  ob-
served for the anteiso-C15 whose relative amount raised from 44.6% to 56.7%, respectively, for 
ATCC 6633 to BBG133. Moreover, the results showed a selective anteiso-C17 mycosubtilin pro-
duction pattern, and that the anteiso-C17 relative amount increased from 45.15% for ATCC 6633 
to 63.6% for BBG133. The iso-C16 isoform represented only 11.7%. 

In  the  mutant  CodY−,  fatty  acid  proﬁles  were  more  directed  on  even-numbered  branched 
chains. In fact, the anteiso-C15 and iso-C16 are equivalently proportional at 33.0% and 29.7%, 
respectively,  and  the  third  most  common  fatty  acid  is  iso-C14,  whose  relative  amount  reaches 
17% but represents just 7% for ATCC 6633 proﬁle. The mycosubtilin proﬁle is thus directed to-
ward a selective iso-C16 (66.1%) pattern.

3. Discussion

3.1. Puriﬁcation and Determination of the Antifungal Activity of Mycosubtilin Isoforms

Mycosubtilin  is  a  lipopeptide  with  a  large  antifungal  spectrum  against  phytopathogens, 
foodborne  pathogens,  and  food  spoilage  [1,2,8].  Its  antifungal  activity  is  the  most  important 
among  the  iturinic  lipopeptides,  such  as  bacillomycin  L,  bacillomycin  F,  bacillomycin  D,  and 
iturin A  [37].  The  different  mycosubtilin  isoforms,  composed  of  different  fatty  acid  length  and 
multiple isomery, presented various biological activities, selective antifungal activities, or biosur-
factant activities. Many studies were performed with mixtures of mycosubtilin isoforms produced 
by B. subtilis. In this work, each major mycosubtilin isoform was puriﬁed in order to test its anti-
fungal activity on a food spoilage microorganism, A. niger.

Our ﬁndings showed that the anteiso-C17 mycosubtilin is the most interesting isoform due 
to its high activity (MIC = 8 μM) against A. niger, at the same level as against B. cinerea [9]. Its 
activity  is  even  higher  than  the  one  of  the  iso-C17  mycosubtilin  (MIC  =  16  µM),  showing  the 
importance  of  the  isomery  of  the  fatty  acid  moiety. Another  result  is  that  the  higher  activity  of 
mycosubtilin iso-C17 compared to the one of the iso-C16 isoform is in line with the study carried 
out previously on iturin A, showing that the antifungal activity is even higher when the chain is 
longer  [18]. The  differences  of  MIC  values  obtained  for  A.  niger  compared  to  those  previously 
obtained  for  C.  albicans  could  be  explained  by  the  main  differences  in  the  composition  of  the 
membrane composition of these microorganisms [38,39].

 
 
 
 
Metabolites 2022, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW

10

 of 

21

3.2. Effect of Amino Acid Feeding during B. subtilis ATCC 6633 Cultures

In order to increase the biosynthesis of one speciﬁc mycosubtilin isoform, a ﬁrst approach of 
feeding  experiments  with  branched  chain  amino  acids,  i.e.,  precursors  of  fatty  acids,  was  per-
formed.

The results presented in Figures 2 and 3 show that the supply in Val favors the biosynthesis 
of even fatty acid, which then results in a high production of mycosubtilin C16 isoform. In con-
trast, Leu and Ile lead to an increase in odd fatty acids (C15 and C17), specially the anteiso form 
for the supply with Ile and, thus, a highly selective anteiso-C17 mycosubtilin production pattern. 
Ile  is  the  precursor  of  odd-branched  fatty  acids  [25,27].  These  results  were  in  accordance  with 
those obtained previously by other authors [7] who used Ile as a nitrogen source for the speciﬁc 
production  of  anteiso-C17  mycosubtilin.  Formerly,  changes  in  the  proportions  of  counterparts 
bacillomycin F and L have been obtained by replacing only the Landy source of nitrogen by other 
amino acids [33]. Besson et al. studied the proportions of β-hydroxy fatty acid incorporated into a 
lipopeptidic compound according to different conditions of addition of amino acids (Leu, Ile and 
Val)  in  different  strains  of  the  B.  subtilis-producing  iturinic  compound  [33]. They  reported  that 
during the biosynthesis of this lipopeptide, the presence of Val could increase the proportion of 
even iso β-hydroxy fatty acid, the presence of Ile of anteiso odd β-hydroxy fatty acid (especially 
counterpart C15), and the presence of Leu of iso odd β-hydroxy fatty acid [33]. Similar work was 
carried out by these authors, based on the incorporation of radioactive sodium acetate into fatty 
acids, who attempted to elucidate the biosynthesis mechanism in iturin-producing B. subtilis [40]. 

3.3. Modiﬁcation of the Selective Synthesis of anteiso-C17 and iso-C16 Mycosubtilin Isoforms

As shown in this work, the modiﬁcation of the cellular fatty acid’s patterns observed with B. 
subtilis  mutants  BBG133  (IlvA+)  and  BV12I37  (CodY−),  compared  to  the  reference  strain  B. 
subtilis ATCC 6633, helps to modify the mycosubtilin isoform patterns. The anteiso-C17 myco-
subtilin production increased from 45.1% for ATCC 6633 to 63.6% for BBG133 (IlvA+), whereas 
the  iso-C16  mycosubtilin  production  increased  from  23.6%  for  ATCC  6633  to  66.1%  for 
BV12I37  (CodY−). These  results  infer  that  the  production  pattern  of  the  different  mycosubtilin 
isoforms is directly linked to the cellular fatty acid pool. Previous results showed the in vitro lack 
of speciﬁcity of the fatty acid loading domain (AL) of the mycosubtilin synthetase. Indeed, the 
loading of the acyl by (AL) does not seem to depend on the length of the carbon chain when it 
was comprised between C10 and C16 [21]. The present work demonstrates that the in vivo load-
ing of fatty acids again shows its tolerance; this time, there was tolerance for the loading of dif-
ferent fatty acid isoforms, including natural iso or anteiso-branched, which could lead to interest-
ing combinatorial biosynthesis prospects.

3.4. Identifying Genetic Targets to Increase the Speciﬁc Production of Mycosubtilin Isoforms

The  biosynthetic  pathways  of  branched  chain  amino  acid  (BCAA)  in  B.  subtilis  are  well 
known  and  previously  modelized  [27].  The  genetic  loci  involved  are  mainly  ilvBHCleuABCD, 
ilvA, ilvD, ybgE, and ywaA [26]. All of these genes or operons are repressed under amino-acid-
rich conditions by the activity of the pleiotropic transcriptional regulator CodY [41–43]. Val and 
Ile  are  positive  effectors  of  CodY,  such  that  BCAA  biosynthesis  is  negatively  autoregulated  at 
relatively low BCAA concentrations [41]. In B. subtilis, CodY controls the expression of a sever-
al  transcriptional  units. The  presence  of  Ile, Val,  and  Leu  in  the  growth  medium  is  essential  to 
obtain both high activity and efﬁcient regulation of target genes [44]. This metabolic pathway is 
at  the  heart  of  the  production  of  branched  chain  amino  acids,  but  also  of  branched  chain  fatty 
acids,  and  is  therefore  of  great  interest  when  one  wishes  to  modify  the  speciﬁc  production  of 
lipopeptide isoforms.

In  this  work,  a  complementary  approach  was  used  to  identify  potential  gene  target  to  be 
modiﬁed in order to produce more speciﬁcally different mycosubtilin isoforms, i.e., anteiso-C17 
and also iso-C16. This approach combined a transcriptomic study in the presence of Ile (an amino 
acid well identiﬁed as a precursor of anteiso fatty acids) and a bioinformatics prediction using a 
previously developed model of the BCAA pathway [27,45]. The results of this approach allowed 
us to identify several targets genes. 

The results of microarray presented in Figure 4 show that in the presence of Ile in the medi-
um, the ilvBHCleuABCD is the main operon overexpressed. Nevertheless, the gene ilvA which is 
also  directly  involved  in  the  metabolic  pathway  of  Ile  production,  did  not  show  up  in  the  tran-

Metabolites 2022, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW

11

 of 

21

scriptomic analysis. This result seems quite coherent because this analysis was carried out in the 
presence  of  an  excess  of  Ile  in  the  medium,  so  that  the  cells  seem  to  counterbalance  their  me-
tabolism towards the production of Leu and Val [41]. The addition of Ile in the culture medium 
led  to  the  repression  of  ybgE,  which  codes  for  an  aminotransferase  involved  in  the  BCAA  me-
tabolism. Its repression should physiologically result in the limitation of the synthesis of BCAA. 
As the growth of the microorganism was normal in the presence of Ile, it was assumed that the 
cellular pool of Leu and Val needed for cellular growth was not affected. A hypothesis to explain 
this phenomenon is that the cell could counterbalance the ybgE repression by overexpressing the 
ilvBHCleuABCD operon and the leuS gene, as shown in the results section of this work. It should 
be noticed that ywaA, which is an isologue of ybgE [46], is not repressed in the presence of Ile, 
which is not critical because of the low enzymatic activity of YwaA compared to YbgE [47].

It is known that several regulators (AbrB and CodY) and environmental factors are implied 
in  the  biosynthesis  of  lipopeptides. The  transcriptomic  results  show  that,  in  the  presence  of  Ile, 
the codY gene is slightly under-expressed (Figure 4). The under-expression of codY in the pres-
ence of BCAA in the medium was effectively shown by authors [41,42]. The over-expression of 
the  transcriptomic  regulator AbrB,  which  is  known  to  negatively  regulate  the  expression  of  the 
mycosubtilin operon [48], was also observed.

In  this  work,  the  over-expression  of  abrB  was  observed,  while  comK  was  repressed.  This 
concomitant differential expression is consistent with previous results. It was indeed shown that 
the  binding  of AbrB  at  position  −35  of  the  comK  promoter  repressed  its  expression  [49].  This 
result is also consistent with those obtained in the presence of casamino acids [50]. The concomi-
tant  over-expression  of  abrB  and  under-expression  of  codY  is  more  difﬁcult  to  explain.  Indeed, 
CodY and AbrB normally act together, for example to repress the expression of comK [49]. Our 
results suggest a reasonably complex mechanism that ﬁne-tunes and regulates the metabolic ac-
tivity  of  B.  subtilis ATCC  6633  when  grown  in  the  presence  of  Ile  to  promote  the  synthesis  of 
mycosubtilin anteiso-C17. 

Prediction results from bioinformatics modelling revealed numerous targets for genetic op-
timization and speciﬁc mycosubtilin isoform production, as presented in Figure 5. Among these, 
the overproduction of the ilvA gene (r22) was predicted. This prediction was then tested in vivo 
by genetically modifying B. subtilis ATCC 6633. The overexpression of the ilvA gene strengthens 
the  conversion  of  Thr  to AkB  by  reaction  41.  Concomitantly,  the  outﬂow  of  Thr  (out-thr)  was 
weakened. If this outﬂow was absent, all Thr would be converted to AkB in any steady state, so 
strengthening r41 would have only a short time effect, but not effect in the steady states. Hence, 
the prediction r22 = ↑ would not be made. This shows that adding the outﬂow of Thr to the model 
was indeed relevant for the predictions. As shown in Figure 7, the overexpression of ilvA had the 
expected effects on the speciﬁc production of the anteiso-C17 mycosubtilin isoform.

From a bioinformatics point of view, it was also veriﬁed that all predictions were exact in 
the sense of [51], which intuitively means that the global reasoning on metabolic loops computes 
the  abstraction  perfectly  without  any  over-approximation.  It  is  closely  related  to  the  notion  of 
completeness of abstract interpretation. To obtain the most precise result, a recent algorithm for 
exact  prediction  was  added  into  the  biocomputing  reaction  network  tool  developed  previously 
[27,50].

Analysis of the predictions reveal that some reactions are both predicted for single overex-
pression  and  single  knockouts,  for  instance  reaction  r15  (CodY  biosynthesis)  and  r47  (YwvA 
biosynthesis). This means that they have both a positive and a negative effect on the target. One 
cannot know which effect is dominating without additional knowledge on the kinetics of the reac-
tions.  This  double  prediction  is  speciﬁcally  explained  by  the  multiple  involvement  of  CodY  in 
this complex metabolic pathway [41]. codY deletion was also undertaken in vivo. This time, the 
result  obtained  is  not  the  one  expected,  and  a  signiﬁcant  change  in  the  mycosubtilin  pattern  is 
indeed observed after the deletion of codY, but the isoform iso-C16 is favored. This result can be 
explained by several reasons. First of all, in this metabolic pathway, the deletion of codY will cer-
tainly lead to a change in the expression of ilvA (r22), ilvD (r25) genes, ilv-leu operon (r2), and 
the bkd operon (r11), but also in the expression of ybgE (r46). The analysis of the bioinformatic 
model helps to explain this result by listing the paths in the graph on which a codY knockout can 
inﬂuence the synthesis of the anteiso-C15 + C17 fatty acid and also the iso-C14 + C16 fatty acid. 
Experiments  showed  that  overexpression  of  the  ilvA  gene  (r22  =  Up)  is  positive  for  the  target 
anteiso-C15 + C17 fatty acid synthesis. However, the effects on r11 = Up (bkd operon) in practice 

Metabolites 2022, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW

12

 of 

21

are not known. In the model, the bkd operon has a positive inﬂuence on both anteiso-C15 + C17 
fatty acid synthesis and iso-C14 + C16 fatty acid synthesis, but these two effects cannot be distin-
guished. The effect of r46 = Up (ybgE) is not clearly deﬁned. In the model, it has a negative effect 
on both the synthesis of anteiso-C15 + C17 fatty acids and the synthesis of iso-C14 + C16 fatty 
acids. From a metabolic point of view, it seems certain that the effect of codY deletion leads to the 
overproduction of the Leu and Val amino acids, as expected. This is the same result observed by 
Brinsmade et al. (2010) [30] where the deletion of codY led to an overproduction of Val by a fac-
tor of 6. These amino acids will then be transformed preferably into iso-branched fatty acids and, 
in particular, into even-numbered fatty acids coming from the degradation of Val. This result is 
consistent  with  the  one  obtained  on  the  production  of  surfactin,  where  the  deletion  of  codY  fa-
vored the biosynthesis of the surfactin Val7 C14 isoform [31]. Other predictions that were made 
included the knock-out of tnrA and ybgE. The deletion of an important regulator, such as TnrA, 
was expected by the known negative impact of TnrA on the promoter of the ilv-leu operon, but 
also on the promoter of the bkd operon [29,52]. It was notably shown that the expression of the 
bkd operon was three times higher in a mutant deleted for tnrA. It should be noted that the tnrA 
target did not emerge from the microarray analysis in the presence of Ile, which conﬁrms the re-
sult obtained by Debarbouille et al. (1999) who did not observe any change in the expression of 
this gene in the presence of 20 mM Ile [29]. The modulation of ybgE expression is also an inter-
esting  target  because  this  gene  also  emerges  from  the  microarray  analysis.  Moreover,  Cai  et  al. 
(2020) also showed that BCAA supply modules may play a role in the production of bacitracin in 
B. licheniformis [53]. In this bacterium, BCAA synthesis pathways were enhanced by the simul-
taneous  overexpression  of  the  acetolactate  synthase  IlvBNfbr,  the  2-isopropylmalate  synthase 
LeuAfbr,  and  the  BCAA  aminotransferase YbgE.  In  addition,  permeases  were  identiﬁed  as  im-
porters of BCAA, and their overexpression enhanced intracellular BCAA accumulations and bac-
itracin yields [53]. This approach to BCAA-speciﬁc permeases would also be interesting to con-
duct  in  B.  subtilis ATCC  6633  with  the  objective  of  improving  the  production  of  mycosubtilin 
isoforms.

Concerning the other predictions and, in particular, the overexpression of the bkd operon (r3, 
r4, and r62) and the ywvA gene, these predictions seem logical because these genes code for en-
zymes  are  directly  involved  in  the  degradation  of  BCAAs  and,  thus,  in  the  biosynthesis  of 
branched chain fatty acids. However, in a recent study on surfactin, the authors showed that over-
expression  of  the  bkd  operon  led  to  a  negative  impact  on  the  growth  of  the  strain  but  also  to  a 
signiﬁcant reduction in surfactin production. Interestingly, this genetic modiﬁcation was coupled 
with others, such as the overexpression of the ilv-leu operon and the lipALM operon (lipoic acid 
biosynthesis) [54]. This highlights the value of multiple genetic modiﬁcations in metabolic engi-
neering strategies.

In view of these known effects of modifying these single targets, it would be appropriate to 
try  a  multiple  knock-out  or  mixed  knock-out  strategy,  as  well  as  an  overexpression  strategy,  as 
has already been undertaken, for example, to increase surfactin synthesis in B. subtilis [54]. From 
a bioinformatics point of view, we also checked that there are no double changes that could satis-
fy the target containing no predicted single changes. Nevertheless, multiple changes may be rea-
sonable, as the effects may add up. In addition, it may be useful to perform knockouts that disable 
feedback loops, as one cannot infer from the model what their effect might be without additional 
kinetic information.

4. Materials and Methods

4.1. Strains and Growth Conditions

B. subtilis ATCC 6633 is a natural isolate producing two lipopeptides, i.e., mycosubtilin and 
surfactin. All  the  B.  subtilis  strains  used  in  this  study  were  derivatives  from  B.  subtilis  ATCC 
6633 (Table 2). All strains were stored at −80 °C in 40% (v/v) glycerol.

Table 2. Plasmid and strains used in this study.

Strains

Genotype/Phenotype

Reference or Source

E. coli

JM 109

recA1, endA1, gyrA96, thi, hsdR17, relA1, supE44, Δ(lac-
proAB), [Fʹ, traD36, proAB, lacI/lacZΔM15]

Promega

Metabolites 2022, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW

13

 of 

21

B. subtilis

ATCC 6633

Wild-type strain/Myc+, Srf+

Laboratory stock

Plasmids

BBG100

RFB102

BBG133

BV12I37

pGEM-T Easy

pBEST501

pBG142

pBG154

ATCC 6633 PrepU neo::myc/Myc+++; Srf+, NmR

Laboratory stock [35]

ATCC 6633 amyE::Pspac-comK-spc/SpcR

Laboratory stock [7]

RFB102 PrepU-neo::ilvA/NmR 

ATCC 6633 ΔcodY, cat kan/CmR, KmR

This work

[48]

Cloning vector/ApR

Promega

pUC9:: PrepU-neo/NmR

Laboratory stock

pGEM-T Easy lacZ::ilvA/ApR

pGEM-T Easy lacZ::PrepU-neo::ilvA/ApR, NmR

This work

This work

ApR: ampicillin resistance; NmR: neomycin resistance, SpcR: spectinomycin resistance, CmR: chlorampheni-
col resistance, KmR: kanamycin resistance.

The preculture was completed in a modiﬁed Clark medium [55], composed as follows: glu-
cose, 20 g/L; KH2PO4, 2.7 g/L; K2HPO4, 18.9 g/L; yeast extract, 0.5 g/L; EDTA, 0.05 g/L; Mg-
SO4, 0.61 g/L; MnSO4, 0.056 g/L; NaCl, 0.1 g/L; CaCl2, 0.012 g/L; ZnSO4, 0.018 g/L; FeSO4, 
0.018 g/L; CuSO4, 0.002 g/L; Na2MoO4, 0.001 g/L; H3BO3, 0.001 g/L; Na2SO3, 0.001 g/L; NiCl2, 
0.0037 g/L; NH4NO3, 4 g/L; and MgSO4, 1 g/L. Cells were then transferred to conical ﬂasks of 
500 mL at an initial biomass concentration of 0.08 g(D.W)/L, corresponding to an optical density 
at 600 nm of 0.25. The ﬁlling volume of culture medium in the conical ﬂasks was 100 mL. By 
using this ﬁlling volume ratio (0.2), at a shaking speed of 160 rpm and a shaking diameter of 50 
mm, the oxygen transfer conditions were limited to 8 mmol O2/L/h, allowing an optimization of 
the  mycosubtilin  productivity,  as  shown  previously  by  authors  [36].  The  cells  were  cultured  in 
Erlenmeyer ﬂasks at 30 °C, at least in triplicate, and mean values and standard deviations were 
calculated. For the cultures of the different mutants used in this work, a modiﬁed Landy medium 
was composed as follows: glucose, 20 g/L; (NH4)2SO4, 2.3 g/L; K2HPO4, 1 g/L; MgSO4, 0.5 g/L; 
KCl, 0.5 g/L; CuSO4, 1.6 mg/L; Fe2(SO4)3, 1.2 mg/L; MnSO4, 0.4 mg/L; and yeast extract, 1 g/L. 
For amino acids testing and transcriptomic experiments, the previous medium was modiﬁed with 
retrieving the yeast extract. Culture media were buffered with MOPS (3-(N-morpholino)propane-
sulphonic acid) at 100 mM at pH 7.0 to favor the synthesis of mycosubtilins [34].

4.2. Mutants of B. subtilis ATCC 6633 Used in This Study

Three different mutants from the wild-type strain B. subtilis ATCC 6633 were constructed or 
used  in  this  work. The  ﬁrst  one,  namely  B.  subtilis  BBG100,  was  obtained  in  a  previous  study 
[35] by replacing the promoter of the mycosubtilin synthase (mycA) operon by a strong and con-
stitutive one, i.e., PrepU originating from the repU gene of Staphylococcus aureus plasmid pUB110 
[56]. The second one, namely B. subtilis BVI2I33, contains a deletion of the codY gene, the con-
struction of which has already been described [48].

The  third  one  is  an  overexpressing  ilvA  mutant  strain,  namely  B.  subtilis  BBG133,  which 
was  constructed  from  the  mutant  RFB102,  a  competent  strain  from  wild-type  B.  subtilis  ATCC 
6633 [7], by replacing the native promoter of the ilvA gene by a constitutive one PrepU. Brieﬂy, 
part of the ilvA gene was ampliﬁed by PCR using ilvA-fwd and ilvA-rev primers (See table S1); 
this  fragment  was  then  puriﬁed  and  ligated  in  pGEM-T  easy  vector  (Promega,  Madison,  WI, 
USA) generating the plasmid pBG142. This plasmid was then used to transform E. coli JM109. 
The plasmid pBEST501 was digested by XbaI and PstI, generating a fragment containing PrepU-
neo.  The  plasmid  pBG142  was  digested  by  BcuI  and  Mph1103I  generating  a  long  fragment  of 
4267  bp  containing  the  gene  ilvA.  This  longer  fragment  and  the  fragment  PrepUneo  from 
pBEST501 were ligated together using T4 DNA ligase (Takara, Shiga, Japan), leading to a new 
plasmid  pBG154,  which  was  used  to  transform  E.  coli  JM109.  The  plasmid  pBG154  was  then 

Metabolites 2022, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW

14

 of 

21

ampliﬁed  using TempliPhi  technology  (Cytiva,  Malborough,  MA,  USA)  prior  to  its  use  for  the 
transformation  of  RFB102.  The  transformation  of  RFB102  with  pBG154  was  performed  using 
natural  competence  protocol  [57].  Transformation  experiments  with  B.  subtilis  RFB102  and 
pBG154  led  to  isolation  of  one  sole  colony.  The  resulting  strain  of  B.  subtilis  was  named 
BBG133. Genomic DNAs of both this clone and the wild-type strain were puriﬁed. Replacement 
of  the  natural  promoter  by  the  constitutive  promoter  PrepU  associated  with  the  neo  gene  was 
demonstrated by PCR ampliﬁcation of genomic DNA with the PrepU-fwd and ilvA2-rev primers. A 
1.9 kb fragment was obtained instead of nothing with the wild type (data not shown). Strains and 
plasmid used in this study are presented in Table 2.

4.3. RNA Isolation, Reverse Transcription and Microarrays

A volume corresponding to 1 × 109 cells of B. subtilis ATCC 6633 was promptly sampled 
and mixed thoroughly with the Ambion Ribopure RNA latter solution (v/v). The RNA isolation 
step was performed speciﬁcally for this strain, as described by authors [58]. For microarray as-
says,  the  reverse  transcription  and  the  cDNA  labelling  were  realized  following  the  protocol  de-
scribed previously [59]. Fluorescently labeled probes were then hybridized to 4096 open reading 
frame (ORF) microarray slides prepared from B. subtilis strain 168 (Eurogentec, Belgium). Mi-
croarray hybridization was performed with 10 µg of cDNA with a Discovery Ventana (Ventana, 
Tucson, AZ, USA). Images were analyzed using GenePix Pro 6 (Axon Instruments, Inc., Union 
City, CA, USA). Spots whose intensity was close to that of the local background or whose circu-
larity  or  homogeneity  was  insufﬁcient  were  excluded.  Data  were  smoothed  by  local-weighted 
smoothing scatterplot (LOWESS) and the consistency of the ﬂip-dye was veriﬁed. Spots whose 
value  was  between  ±2  of  the  mean  value  of  the  distribution  of  spot  values  (slice  analysis),  or 
spots that were not present in the form of duplicates, were excluded. At the end, genes involved in 
metabolic  pathways  were  considered  to  be  differentially  expressed  if  they  displayed  ≥2-fold 
changes  and  a  p-value  <  0.05.  For  genes  coding  for  regulators,  the  differential  expression  was 
considered  for  ≥1.6-fold  changes.  For  the  codY  gene,  a  speciﬁc  wrapper-based  gene  selection 
technique  was  applied  (bootstrap  classiﬁcation  combined  to  variance  analysis).  Array  data  are 
available in the Supplementary Material Figure S2. 

4.4. Model-Based Change Prediction for the Anteiso Fatty Acid Precurssor Overproduction

In  order  to  predict  by  bioinformatic  gene  knock-out  or  gene  overexpression,  the  reaction 
network model of the metabolic pathway of the branched chain amino acids leucine (Leu), valine 
(Val), and isoleucine (Ile) from threonine (Thr) and pyruvate (Pyr) in B. subtilis was used. This 
model was ﬁrst presented in [27] when studying the overproduction of Leu, demonstrating that it 
is a crucial precursor of surfactin. This reaction network is shown in Figure S2. For the prediction 
of  gene  knockouts  that  may  lead  to  Leu  overproduction,  a  biocomputing  reaction  network  tool 
was applied [49]. With the target out-Leu = ↑, the tool produced the predictions presented in Fig-
ure S3, where r = ⇓ stood for the prediction of the knockout of reaction r. The tool ran the predic-
tion algorithm for reaction networks with partial kinetic information from [43], based on abstract 
interpretation. The idea was to abstract change between real values in the steady states to sym-
bols, such as ↑ for an increase, Do for a decrease, and ⇓ for a decrease to 0. The possible changes 
for  knockout  predictions  were  reaction  knockouts  r  =  ⇓.  The  tool,  however,  could  also  predict 
increase inﬂows of a species S, that is in-S = ↑, and decreases of inﬂows in-S = ↓. Such predic-
tions meant that changes of the experimental environment, or of adjacent reaction networks, may 
lead to the target. 

Abstract interpretation enables local reasoning in the graph of the network graph. Local rea-
soning alone, however, is problematic for graphs with loops. In this case, it may lead to a large 
over-approximation,  such  as  predicting  changes  which  may  not  lead  to  the  target.  The  original 
algorithm of the BioComputing’s tool, therefore, used heuristics based on rewritten rules for dif-
ferent constraints [43] to reduce the over-approximation in the presence of loops. Meanwhile, an 
exact treatment of loops in the metabolic part of the network was developed [49], which relies on 
the usage of elementary ﬂux modes (EFMs). For instance, the EFMs of the reaction network in 
Figure S3 are shown in Figure 8. The dark gray and black EFMs show that inﬂowing of Pyr can 
be used in the production of Leu and Val, respectively. The yellow EFMs show that Thr is needed 
for the production of Ile too, concomitantly with Pyr. The usage of EFMs helps to add nontrivial 
global reasoning power based on metabolic loops that is essential for precise predictions. Feed-

Metabolites 2022, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW

15

 of 

21

back loops through the regulatory control network, however, remain problematic, as will be ana-
lyzed hereafter.

Figure 8. Elementary ﬂux modes (EFMs) of the metabolic subnetwork of the reaction network in Figure S3. 
The dark gray ﬂux mode show that inﬂow Pyr can be used to produce outﬂowing Leu. The black ﬂux mode 
shows that Pyr can also be used to produce outﬂowing Val. Furthermore, the yellow ﬂux mode shows that 
inﬂowing Pyr contributes to the production of Ile but only concomitantly with inﬂowing Thr. 

To  produce  the  anteiso-C17  mycosubtilin  isoform,  an  increase  in  the  outﬂow  of  MetBut-
CoA into the FA biosynthesis of anteiso-C15 fatty acid is required. MetBut-CoA can, for instance, 
be produced from Ile. The reaction network in Figure S2 collapses MetBut-CoA with IsoBut-CoA 
and  IsoVal-CoA  into  a  single  species  called Acyl-CoA.  So,  in  our  previous  model,  one  cannot 
distinguish the outﬂow of MetBut-CoA towards the wanted fatty acid chain, in particular anteiso-
C15, from the outﬂows of IsoBut-CoA (coming from Val) toward the FA biosynthesis of iso-C14 
and iso-C16 and the outﬂow of IsoVal-CoA (coming from Leu) to the FA bio-synthesis of iso-C13 
and iso-C15. Therefore, the reaction network was modiﬁed in the present work to adapt the reac-
tion network from Figure S2, so that it splits Acyl-CoA into species MetBut-CoA, IsoBut-CoA, 
and IsoVal-CoA. This is the ﬁrst step leading from the reaction network presented in Figure S2 to 
that presented in Figure S3 (Figure 8).

Further improvements to the reaction network described below are shown in Figure S4. This 
ﬁgure contains some more important changes compared to Figure S2, not only the split of Acyl-
CoA. In particular, new outﬂows for Thr and Pyr to the protein and other amino acids or primary 
metabolites synthesis were added. Biologically, this was justiﬁed since these amino acids can also 
be used in the production of proteins during gene expression elsewhere. This adds the green EFM 
moving inﬂowing Thr to its new outﬂow, and the light blue EFM moving inﬂowing Pyr to its new 
outﬂow (Figure 8). Change predictions that lead to over-activating these EFMs will turn out par-
ticularly  relevant  later  on.  Furthermore,  some  other  simpliﬁcations  were  performed.  First,  the 

Metabolites 2022, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW

16

 of 

21

species glutamic acid (Glu) and oxoglutarate (OxoGlu) were removed. The main reason was that 
only carbon (C) was of interest, not azote (N). Second, the reactions 12 and 13 were revised since 
the changes of 12 and 13 were the same biologically. This led us to the reactions 62 and 63. Final-
ly, an algorithm was also improved to not only predict gene knockouts but also gene overexpres-
sion. For this, however, the biocomputing reaction network tool was extended with the ability to 
overexpress candidate genes.

After  all  these  modiﬁcations,  the  use  of  the  BioComputing’s  reaction  network  tool  on  the 
reaction network did not work well the ﬁrst time, for several reasons. The ﬁrst problem was that 
the addition of the outﬂows out-Thr and out-Pyr increased the computation time, so that only few 
predictions could be observed after some hours. Some results could be only obtained in reason-
able  computation  time  when  the  outﬂows  were  removed  again,  as  presented  in  Figure  S2.  The 
second problem was that a large number of predictions was made, as shown in Figure S3, some of 
which do not seem to be relevant and cannot be justiﬁed biologically, especially as most of them 
are common to the previous predictions made with Leu = ↑ as the target [27]. As a result, it was 
difﬁcult to determine whether these were false positives or not from a biological or bioinformatic 
point  of  view.  It  turned  out  that  the  unexpected  predictions  were  spontaneous  over  approxima-
tions. It was then noticed that these over-approximations were related to feedback loops through 
network regulation. However, with the currently available algorithms, it was not possible to dis-
pose  of  these  over  approximations.  Therefore,  a  decision  was  made  to  remove  the  regulatory 
feedback loops, even if they were biologically justiﬁed, resulting in the reaction network present-
ed in Figure S4.

The  reﬁned  reaction  network  was  then  used  to  predict  the  overproduction  of  odd  anteiso 
fatty acids (Figure 5). When these predictions were launched, a ﬁnal problem was detected, relat-
ed to the very high computation time of the solver used by the BioComputing’s reaction network 
tool. This raised serious difﬁculties when adding the outﬂows out-Thr and out-Pyr in particular, 
as presented above. The reason for this problem was linked to the search strategy chosen by the 
solver. Once the search strategy was improved, single changes in Figure 5 were predicted in a few 
seconds.

4.5. Lipopeptide HPLC Analysis

Samples of B. subtilis cultures were centrifuged at 10,000 × g for 10 min. A volume of 1 mL 
of  the  supernatant  was  puriﬁed  through  C18  Maxi-Clean  cartridges  1  g  (Alltech,  Deerﬁeld,  IL, 
USA). The column was washed with 8 mL of water. The lipopeptides were then eluted with 8 mL 
of 100% methanol (HPLC grade, Acros Organics, Geel, Belgium). The extract was dried before 
dissolution  in  200  µL  of  methanol. The  sample  was  then  injected  and  analyzed  by  high-perfor-
mance  liquid  chromatography  (Online  Degaser,  717 Autosampler,  660S  Controller,  626  Pump, 
996 PhotoDiodeArray, Waters Corp., Milford, MA, USA) using a C18 column (5 µm, 250 × 4.6 
mm,  218  TP,  VYDAC).  The  mycosubtilins  were  separated  with  an  acetonitrile/water/triﬂuo-
roacetic acid solvent, 40:60:0.1, v/v/v. The ﬂow rate was 1 mL/min and the detection wavelength 
was  214  nm.  Puriﬁed  iturin  A  and  surfactin  A,  used  as  standards,  were  from  Sigma  (Sigma-
Aldrich, Saint Louis, MI, USA). The retention time and second derivative of the absorption spec-
trum between 200 and 400 nm (Diode Array PDA 996, Waters) were used to identify the eluted 
molecules (Millenium 32 Software, Waters). 

4.6. Lipopeptide Preparation

A volume of 10 mL of the culture supernatants was puriﬁed through C18 Maxi-Clean 10 g 
cartridges (Alltech). Compared to the lipopeptide HPLC analysis protocol, all the volumes used 
were  adapted.  A  sample  of  100  μL  of  the  lipopeptide  mixture  concentrated  at  250  mg/L  was 
charged in the HPLC (Online Degaser, 717 Autosampler, 660S Controller, 626 Pump, 996 Pho-
toDiodeArray, Waters Corp., Milford, MA, USA). The column used was a C18 (5 μm, 300 × 10 
mm, ACE), working at a ﬂow rate of 3 mL/min. The mycosubtilins were separated with an ace-
tonitrile–water–triﬂuoroacetic acid solvent, 35:65:0.1, v/v/v for 54 min, followed by a 6 min rins-
ing  step  with  acetonitrile–triﬂuoroacetic  acid  solvent,  100:0.1,  v/v. As  for  lipopeptides  analysis, 
the  retention  time  and  second  derivative  of  the  absorption  spectrum  between  200  and  400  nm 
were used to identify the eluted molecules (Millenium 32 Software, Waters). 

4.6.1. Lipopeptide Tandem Mass Spectrometry MS-MS Analysis

Metabolites 2022, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW

17

 of 

21

The different isoforms of mycosubtilin produced by B. subtilis BBG100 were determined by 
analyzing the puriﬁed samples with tandem mass spectrometry (MS-MS), electrospray, and an ion 
trap.  Measurements  were  made  by  direct  infusion  of  the  open  peptide  after  treatment  with  N-
bromosuccinimide, as described previously [9,60]. 

4.6.2. Determination of the Mycosubtilin Isoforms by GC

The identiﬁcation of mycosubtilin isoforms was completed with performing GC. The proto-
col used for hydrolysis of mycosubtilin was the one for iturinic compounds [33]. Brieﬂy, 1 mg of 
lipopeptide was hydrolyzed in the presence of 12 M HCl/methanol (30/70) during 15 h at 150 °C. 
Methanol  was  evaporated  and  fatty  acids  were  extracted  with  chloroform.  The  extract  was 
washed twice with water milliQ. Chloroform was evaporated and the fatty acids were suspended 
in 100% methanol. The fatty acid methyl esters (FAMEs) of the samples and the reference com-
pounds were prepared by boron triﬂuoride-catalyzed methylation (AOCS, 1998) and analyzed by 
gas chromatography (GC). The analysis of the MEFAs in hexane was performed with a GC sys-
tem (HP6890, Agilent Technologies Inc., Santa Clara, CA, USA) equipped with a split–splitless 
injector  and  a  ﬂame  ionization  detector.  An  INNOWAX  capillary  column  (Agilent, 
ref.19091N-133; length, 30 m; diameter, 0.25 mm; 0.25 m ﬁlm) was used to separate the MEFAs. 
The GC conditions were as follows: injector temperature at 250 °C and detector temperature at 
250 °C. The carrier gas was helium at a ﬂow rate of 2.4 mL/min. The temperature program is 10 
min at 50 °C, 30 °C/min to 150 °C; 4 °C/min to 240 °C; and 10 min at 240 °C. The fatty acids 
were  identiﬁed  by  GC  by  an  injection  of  Supelco  (ref.47885-U)  and  Larodan  standards  for  iso 
and anteiso fatty acids (ref.11-1514-7 and 11-1614-7). 

4.7. Cellular Fatty Acid Analysis

The cells were harvested from the 100 mL cultures and centrifugated at 10,000 × g for 10 
min at 4 °C. The pellets were washed twice with sterile distilled water and transferred into extrac-
tion  screw-cap  tubes.  Bacteria  were  subsequently  submitted  to  saponiﬁcation  and  methylation, 
and their fatty acid methyl esters were extracted, as described previously [61]. Analysis of fatty 
acid methyl esters was carried out by gas chromatography performed on a Shimadzu GC14A gas 
chromatograph (Courtaboeuf, France) equipped with a 30 m × 0.25 mm BPX5 (SGE, Villeneuve 
St George, France) capillary column, as previously described [62].

4.8. Bacterial Dry Weight Analysis

The bacterial dry weight was determined after drying for 48 h at 110 °C in a washed pellet 
of a 10 mL sample. The optical density at 600 nm was read with a spectrophotometer SECOMAN 
Prim (SECOMAN, Domont, France).

4.9. Determination of Minimal Inhibitory Concentrations

Antifungal  activity  tests  against  A.  niger  were  performed  by  successive  half-dilutions  of 
various solutions of mycosubtilin isoforms (iso-C16, n-C16, anteiso-C17 and iso-C17) in 96-well 
microplates  containing  200  µL  of  culture  medium  (glucose,  40  g/L;  peptone,  10  g/L;  yeast  ex-
tract, 2 g/L) [13]. A standard mycosubtilin mixture was also tested, composed of iso-C16 (26%), 
Gln3 C17 (1%), n-C16 (2%), anteiso-C17 (45%), and iso-C17 (23%). The inoculation of the two 
microorganisms was realized at an optical density of 0.55 followed by an incubation at 28 °C and 
280 rpm. The minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) was determined after 24 h of incubation. 

5. Conclusions

In this work, we implemented a metabolic engineering strategy based on two approaches in 
parallel (transcriptomics and bioinformatics) to target genetic modiﬁcations, allowing the selec-
tive production of mycosubtilin isoforms, and more particularly, the C17-anteiso isoform. Thanks 
to a major reﬁnement of the model of the previously developed BCA metabolic pathway, we were 
able to predict new gene knock-out or gene overexpression targets, tested of which were tested in 
vivo. Overexpression of the ilvA gene showed a signiﬁcant impact on the production of the de-
sired  mycosubtilin  isoform,  while  codY  knockout  showed  more  contrasting  results.  This  work 
allowed us to reﬁne the prediction tool, making it more reliable, notably by simplifying certain 
reactions  and  removing  feedback  loops.  However,  from  a  bioinformatics  point  of  view,  further 

Metabolites 2022, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW

18

 of 

21

research is needed to obtain equally reliable predictions, taking into account the feedback loops. 
In  addition,  the  other  predictions  shown  in  this  work  represent  a  gold  mine  of  information  for 
future optimization work.

Supplementary Materials: 

Author Contributions: Conceptualization: J.-S.G., F.C. (François Coutte) and P.J.; Methodology: J.-S.G., 
F.C. (François Coutte), F.C. (Françoise Coucheney), J.N., N.-E.C. and M.B.; Investigation: J.G., J.-S.G., F.C. 
(François Coutte), F.C. (Françoise Coucheney), J.N. and M.B.; Writing—original draft preparation: J.-S.G., 
F.C.  (François  Coutte)  and  J.N.;  Writing—review  and  editing:  F.C.  (Françoise  Coucheney),  J.-S.G.,  F.C. 
(François Coutte), P.F., J.N. and P.J.; Funding: P.J. All authors have read and agreed to the published version 
of the manuscript.

Funding:  This  research  received  funding  from  the  ALIBIOTECH  program  funding  administered  by  the 
Hauts-de-France region. Joany Guy was supported by grant funded by the French Ministry of Research.

Acknowledgments: The authors would like to thank Kuipers lab for kindly sending strain BV12I37, Aurélie 
De Graer for its technical participation during molecular biology work, and Pierre-Marie Danzé and Anne-
Sophie Drucbert for their kind assistance during the microarray experiments.

Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest. The funders had no role in the design of the 
study; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or in the decision 
to publish the results.

Metabolites 2022, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW

19

 of 

21

References

Jacques, P. Surfactin and Other Lipopeptides from Bacillus Spp. In Biosurfactants: From Genes to Applications; Soberón-

Besson, F.; Michel, G. Action of Mycosubtilin, an Antifungal Antibiotic of Bacillus Subtilis, on the Cell Membrane of Sac-

Ongena,  M.;  Jacques,  P.  Bacillus  Lipopeptides:  Versatile  Weapons  for  Plant  Disease  Biocontrol.  Trends  in  Microbiology 

1. 
2008, 16, 115–125, doi:10.1016/j.tim.2007.12.009.
2. 
Chávez, G., Ed.; Microbiology Monographs; Springer: Berlin, Heidelberg, 2011; pp. 57–91 ISBN 978-3-642-14490-5.
3. 
Nasir, M.N.; Benichou, E.; Guez, J.S.; Jacques, P.; Brevet, P.-F.; Besson, F. Second Harmonic Generation to Monitor the 
Interactions of the Antimicrobial Mycosubtilin with Membrane-Mimicking Interfacial Monolayers. BioNanoScience 2012, 2, 108–
112.
Latoud, C.; Peypoux, F.; Michel, G. Action of Iturin A, an Antifungal Antibiotic from Bacillus Subtilis, on the Yeast Sac-
4. 
charomyces  Cerevisiae:  Modiﬁcations  of  Membrane  Permeability  and  Lipid  Composition.  J  Antibiot  (Tokyo)  1987,  40,  1588–
1595, doi:10.7164/antibiotics.40.1588.
5.  Maget-Dana, R.; Ptak, M. Iturin Lipopeptides: Interactions of Mycosubtilin with Lipids in Planar Membranes and Mixed 
Monolayers. Biochim Biophys Acta 1990, 1023, 34–40, doi:10.1016/0005-2736(90)90006-a.
6. 
charomyces Cerevisiae. Microbios 1989, 59, 113–121.
Fickers, P.; Guez, J.-S.; Damblon, C.; Leclère, V.; Béchet, M.; Jacques, P.; Joris, B. High-Level Biosynthesis of the Anteiso-
7. 
C(17) Isoform of the Antibiotic Mycosubtilin in Bacillus Subtilis and Characterization of Its Candidacidal Activity. Applied and 
environmental microbiology 2009, 75, 4636–4640, doi:10.1128/AEM.00548-09.
8. 
Kourmentza, K.; Gromada, X.; Michael, N.; Degraeve, C.; Vanier, G.; Ravallec, R.; Coutte, F.; Karatzas, K.A.; Jauregi, P. 
Antimicrobial Activity of Lipopeptide Biosurfactants Against Foodborne Pathogen and Food Spoilage Microorganisms and Their 
Cytotoxicity. Front. Microbiol. 2021, 11, doi:10.3389/fmicb.2020.561060.
9. 
Béchet,  M.;  Castéra-Guy,  J.;  Guez,  J.-S.;  Chihib,  N.-E.;  Coucheney,  F.;  Coutte,  F.;  Fickers,  P.;  Leclère, V.; Wathelet,  B.; 
Jacques, P. Production of a Novel Mixture of Mycosubtilins by Mutants of Bacillus Subtilis. Bioresource Technology 2013, 145, 
264–270, doi:10.1016/j.biortech.2013.03.123.
10.  Desmyttere, H.; Deweer, C.; Muchembled, J.; Sahmer, K.; Jacquin, J.; Coutte, F.; Jacques, P. Antifungal Activities of Bacil-
lus Subtilis Lipopeptides to Two Venturia Inaequalis Strains Possessing Different Tebuconazole Sensitivity. Front Microbiol 2019, 
10, 2327, doi:10.3389/fmicb.2019.02327.
11.  Mejri, S.; Siah, A.; Coutte, F.; Magnin-Robert, M.; Randoux, B.; Tisserant, B.; Krier, F.; Jacques, P.; Reignault, P.; Halama, 
P. Biocontrol of the Wheat Pathogen Zymoseptoria Tritici Using Cyclic Lipopeptides from Bacillus Subtilis. Environ Sci Pollut 
Res 2018, 25, 29822–29833, doi:10.1007/s11356-017-9241-9.
12.  Deravel, J.; Lemière, S.; Coutte, F.; Krier, F.; Van Hese, N.; Béchet, M.; Sourdeau, N.; Höfte, M.; Leprêtre, A.; Jacques, P. 
Mycosubtilin and Surfactin Are Efﬁcient, Low Ecotoxicity Molecules for the Biocontrol of Lettuce Downy Mildew. Appl Micro-
biol Biotechnol 2014, 98, 6255–6264, doi:10.1007/s00253-014-5663-1.
13.  Besson, F.; Peypoux, F.; Michel, G.; Delcambe, L. Antifungal Activity upon Saccharomyces Cerevisiae of Iturin A, Myco-
subtilin,  Bacillomycin  L  and  of Their  Derivatives;  Inhibition  of This Antifungal Activity  by  Lipid Antagonists.  The  Journal  of 
Antibiotics 1979, 32, 828–833, doi:10.7164/antibiotics.32.828.
14.  Kohli,  R.M.;  Trauger,  J.W.;  Schwarzer,  D.;  Marahiel,  M.A.;  Walsh,  C.T.  Generality  of  Peptide  Cyclization  Catalyzed  by 
Isolated Thioesterase Domains of Nonribosomal Peptide Synthetases. Biochemistry 2001, 40, 7099–7108, doi:10.1021/bi010036j.
15.  Genest, M.; Marion, D.; Caille, A.; Ptak, M. Modelling and Reﬁnement of the Conformation of Mycosubtilin in Solution 
from Two-Dimensional NMR Data. Eur J Biochem 1987, 169, 389–398, doi:10.1111/j.1432-1033.1987.tb13625.x.
16.  Marion, D.; Genest, M.; Caille, A.; Peypoux, F.; Michel, G.; Ptak, M. Conformational Study of Bacterial Lipopeptides: Re-
ﬁnement of the Structure of Iturin A in Solution by Two-Dimensional 1H-NMR and Energy Calculations. Biopolymers 1986, 25, 
153–170, doi:10.1002/bip.360250111.
17.  Razaﬁndralambo, H.; Popineau, Y.; Deleu, M.; Hbid, C.; Jacques, P.; Thonart, P.; Paquot, M. Foaming Properties of Lipo-
peptides Produced by Bacillus Subtilis:  Effect of Lipid and Peptide Structural Attributes. J. Agric. Food Chem. 1998, 46, 911–
916, doi:10.1021/jf970592d.
18.  Hbid, C. Contribution à l’étude de la relation entre la structure des lipopeptides de Bacillus subtilis et leurs activités hémo-
lytique et antifongique. PhD Thesis, University of Liège: Belgium, 1996.
19.  Eshita, S.M.; Roberto, N.H.; Beale, J.M.; Mamiya, B.M.; Workman, R.F. Bacillomycin Lc, a New Antibiotic of the Iturin 
Group: Isolations, Structures, and Antifungal Activities of the Congeners. J Antibiot (Tokyo) 1995, 48, 1240–1247, doi:10.7164/
antibiotics.48.1240.
20.  Duitman, E.H.; Hamoen, L.W.; Rembold, M.; Venema, G.; Seitz, H.; Saenger, W.; Bernhard, F.; Reinhardt, R.; Schmidt, M.; 
Ullrich, C.; et al. The Mycosubtilin Synthetase of Bacillus Subtilis ATCC6633: A Multifunctional Hybrid between a Peptide Syn-
thetase, an Amino Transferase, and a Fatty Acid Synthase. PNAS 1999, 96, 13294–13299, doi:10.1073/pnas.96.23.13294.

Metabolites 2022, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW

20

 of 

21

21.  Hansen, D.B.; Bumpus, S.B.; Aron, Z.D.; Kelleher, N.L.; Walsh, C.T. The Loading Module of Mycosubtilin:  An Adenyla-
tion Domain with Fatty Acid Selectivity. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2007, 129, 6366–6367, doi:10.1021/ja070890j.
22.  Aron, Z.D.; Dorrestein, P.C.; Blackhall, J.R.; Kelleher, N.L.; Walsh, C.T. Characterization of a New Tailoring Domain in 
Polyketide Biogenesis:  The Amine Transferase Domain of MycA in the Mycosubtilin Gene Cluster. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2005, 127, 
14986–14987, doi:10.1021/ja055247g.
23.  Weissman,  K.J.;  Leadlay,  P.F.  Combinatorial  Biosynthesis  of  Reduced  Polyketides.  Nat  Rev  Microbiol  2005,  3,  925–936, 
doi:10.1038/nrmicro1287.
24.  Suutari,  M.;  Laakso,  S.  Unsaturated  and  Branched  Chain-Fatty Acids  in Temperature Adaptation  of  Bacillus  Subtilis  and 
Bacillus Megaterium. Biochim Biophys Acta 1992, 1126, 119–124, doi:10.1016/0005-2760(92)90281-y.
25.  Kaneda, T. Fatty Acids of the Genus Bacillus: An Example of Branched-Chain Preference. Bacteriol Rev 1977, 41, 391–
418.
26.  Mäder, U.; Hennig, S.; Hecker, M.; Homuth, G. Transcriptional Organization and Posttranscriptional Regulation of the Ba-
cillus  Subtilis  Branched-Chain  Amino  Acid  Biosynthesis  Genes.  J  Bacteriol  2004,  186,  2240–2252,  doi:10.1128/
JB.186.8.2240-2252.2004.
27.  Coutte, F.; Niehren, J.; Dhali, D.; John, M.; Versari, C.; Jacques, P. Modeling Leucine’s Metabolic Pathway and Knockout 
Prediction Improving the Production of Surfactin, a Biosurfactant from Bacillus Subtilis. Biotechnology Journal 2015, 10, 1216–
1234, doi:https://doi.org/10.1002/biot.201400541.
28.  Fink, P.S. Biosynthesis of the Branched-Chain Amino Acids. In Bacillus subtilis and Other Gram-Positive Bacteria; John 
Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 1993; pp. 307–317 ISBN 978-1-68367-277-7.
29.  Debarbouille, M.; Gardan, R.; Arnaud, M.; Rapoport, G. Role of BkdR, a Transcriptional Activator of the SigL-Dependent 
Isoleucine and Valine Degradation Pathway in Bacillus Subtilis. Journal of bacteriology 1999, 181, 2059–2066.
30.  Brinsmade, S.R.; Kleijn, R.J.; Sauer, U.; Sonenshein, A.L. Regulation of CodY Activity through Modulation of Intracellular 
Branched-Chain Amino Acid Pools. Journal of Bacteriology 2010, 192, 6357–6368, doi:10.1128/JB.00937-10.
31.  Dhali, D.; Coutte, F.; Arias, A.A.; Auger, S.; Bidnenko, V.; Chataigné, G.; Lalk, M.; Niehren, J.; Sousa, J. de; Versari, C.; et 
al. Genetic Engineering of the Branched Fatty Acid Metabolic Pathway of Bacillus Subtilis for the Overproduction of Surfactin 
C<inf>14</Inf>isoform. Biotechnology Journal 2017, 12, doi:10.1002/biot.201600574.
32.  Wang, C.; Cao, Y.; Wang, Y.; Sun, L.; Song, H. Enhancing Surfactin Production by Using Systematic CRISPRi Repression 
to  Screen  Amino  Acid  Biosynthesis  Genes  in  Bacillus  Subtilis.  Microbial  Cell  Factories  2019,  18,  90,  doi:10.1186/
s12934-019-1139-4.
33.  Besson, F.; Tenoux, I.; Hourdou, M.L.; Michel, G. Synthesis of Beta-Hydroxy Fatty Acids and Beta-Amino Fatty Acids by 
the  Strains  of  Bacillus  Subtilis  Producing  Iturinic  Antibiotics.  Biochim  Biophys  Acta  1992,  1123,  51–58, 
doi:10.1016/0005-2760(92)90170-z.
34.  Guez, J.-S.; Vassaux, A.; Larroche, C.; Jacques, P.; Coutte, F. New Continuous Process for the Production of Lipopeptide 
Biosurfactants in Foam Overﬂowing Bioreactor. Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol. 2021, 9, doi:10.3389/fbioe.2021.678469.
35.  Leclere,  V.;  Béchet,  M.;  Adam,  A.;  Guez,  J.-S.;  Wathelet,  B.;  Ongena,  M.;  Thonart,  P.;  Gancel,  F.;  Chollet-Imbert,  M.; 
Jacques, P. Mycosubtilin Overproduction by Bacillus Subtilis BBG100 Enhances the Organism’s Antagonistic and Biocontrol Ac-
tivities. Applied and environmental microbiology 2005, 71, 4577–4584.
36.  Guez, J.S.; Müller, C.H.; Danze, P.M.; Büchs, J.; Jacques, P. Respiration Activity Monitoring System (RAMOS), an Efﬁ-
cient Tool to Study the Inﬂuence of the Oxygen Transfer Rate on the Synthesis of Lipopeptide by Bacillus Subtilis ATCC6633. 
Journal of biotechnology 2008, 134, 121–126.
37.  Thimon, L.; Peypoux, F.; Maget-Dana, R.; Roux, B.; Michel, G. Interactions of Bioactive Lipopeptides, Iturin A and Surfac-
tin from Bacillus Subtilis. Biotechnol Appl Biochem 1992, 16, 144–151.
38.  Löfﬂer, J.; Einsele, H.; Hebart, H.; Schumacher, U.; Hrastnik, C.; Daum, G. Phospholipid and Sterol Analysis of Plasma 
Membranes  of  Azole-Resistant  Candida  Albicans  Strains.  FEMS  Microbiology  Letters  2000,  185,  59–63,  doi:10.1111/
j.1574-6968.2000.tb09040.x.
39.  Tereshina, V.M.; Memorskay, A.S.; Kotlova, E.R.; Feoﬁlov, E.P. Membrane Lipid and Cytosol Carbohydrate Composition 
in Aspergillus Niger under Heat Shock. Microbiology 2010, 79, 40–46, doi:10.1134/S0026261710010066.
40.  Hourdou, M.L.; Besson, F.; Tenoux, I.; Michel, G. Fatty Acid and Beta-Amino Acid Syntheses in Strains of Bacillus Subti-
lis Producing Iturinic Antibiotics. Lipids 1989, 24, 940–944, doi:10.1007/BF02544538.
41.  Sonenshein,  A.L.  Control  of  Key  Metabolic  Intersections  in  Bacillus  Subtilis.  Nat  Rev  Microbiol  2007,  5,  917–927, 
doi:10.1038/nrmicro1772.
42.  Brinsmade, S.R.; Alexander, E.L.; Livny, J.; Stettner, A.I.; Segrè, D.; Rhee, K.Y.; Sonenshein, A.L. Hierarchical Expression 
of  Genes  Controlled  by  the  Bacillus  Subtilis  Global  Regulatory  Protein  CodY.  PNAS  2014,  111,  8227–8232,  doi:10.1073/
pnas.1321308111.

Metabolites 2022, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW

21

 of 

21

43.  Molle, V.; Nakaura, Y.; Shivers, R.; Yamaguchi, H.; Losick, R.; Fujita, Y.; Sonenshein, A. Additional Targets of the Bacillus 
Subtilis Global Regulator CodY Identiﬁed by Chromatin Immunoprecipitation and Genome-Wide Transcript Analysis. Journal of 
Bacteriology 2003, 185, 1911–1922, doi:10.1128/jb.185.6.1911-1922.2003.
44.  Belitsky, B.R.; Brinsmade, S.R.; Sonenshein, A.L. Intermediate Levels of Bacillus Subtilis CodY Activity Are Required for 
Derepression of the Branched-Chain Amino Acid Permease, BraB. PLoS Genetics 2015, 11, doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1005600.
45.  Niehren, J.; Versari, C.; John, M.; Coutte, F.; Jacques, P. Predicting Changes of Reaction Networks with Partial Kinetic In-
formation. BioSystems 2016, 149, doi:10.1016/j.biosystems.2016.09.003.
46.  Thomaides, H.B.; Davison, E.J.; Burston, L.; Johnson, H.; Brown, D.R.; Hunt, A.C.; Errington, J.; Czaplewski, L. Essential 
Bacterial Functions Encoded by Gene Pairs. J Bacteriol 2007, 189, 591–602, doi:10.1128/JB.01381-06.
47.  Berger,  B.J.;  English,  S.;  Chan,  G.;  Knodel,  M.H.  Methionine  Regeneration  and Aminotransferases  in  Bacillus  Subtilis, 
Bacillus Cereus, and Bacillus Anthracis. J Bacteriol 2003, 185, 2418–2431, doi:10.1128/JB.185.8.2418-2431.2003.
48.  Duitman, E.H.; Wyczawski, D.; Boven, L.G.; Venema, G.; Kuipers, O.P.; Hamoen, L.W. Novel Methods for Genetic Trans-
formation of Natural Bacillus Subtilis Isolates Used to Study the Regulation of the Mycosubtilin and Surfactin Synthetases. Appl 
Environ Microbiol 2007, 73, 3490–3496, doi:10.1128/AEM.02751-06.
49.  Hamoen,  L.W.;  Kausche,  D.;  Marahiel,  M.A.;  van  Sinderen,  D.;  Venema,  G.;  Serror,  P.  The  Bacillus  Subtilis  Transition 
State Regulator AbrB Binds to the -35 Promoter Region of ComK. FEMS Microbiol Lett 2003, 218, 299–304, doi:10.1111/j.1574-
6968.2003.tb11532.x.
50.  Kaan, T.; Homuth, G.; Mäder, U.; Bandow, J.; Schweder, T. Genome-Wide Transcriptional Proﬁling of the Bacillus Subtilis 
Cold-Shock Response. Microbiology (Reading) 2002, 148, 3441–3455, doi:10.1099/00221287-148-11-3441.
51.  Allart, E.; Niehren, J.; Versari, C. Computing Difference Abstractions of Linear Equation Systems. Theoretical Computer 
Science 2021, 893, 72–104, doi:10.1016/j.tcs.2021.06.030.
52.  Tojo, S.; Satomura, T.; Morisaki, K.; Yoshida, K.-I.; Hirooka, K.; Fujita, Y. Negative Transcriptional Regulation of the Ilv-
Leu Operon for Biosynthesis of Branched-Chain Amino Acids through the Bacillus Subtilis Global Regulator TnrA. Journal of 
Bacteriology 2004, 186, 7971–7979, doi:10.1128/JB.186.23.7971-7979.2004.
53.  Cai, D.; Zhu, J.; Li, Y.; Li, L.; Zhang, M.; Wang, Z.; Yang, H.; Li, J.; Yang, Z.; Chen, S. Systematic Engineering of Branch 
Chain Amino Acid Supply Modules for the Enhanced Production of Bacitracin from Bacillus Licheniformis. Metabolic Enginee-
ring Communications 2020, 11, e00136, doi:10.1016/j.mec.2020.e00136.
54.  Wu, Q.; Zhi, Y.; Xu, Y. Systematically Engineering the Biosynthesis of a Green Biosurfactant Surfactin by Bacillus Subtilis 
168. Metab Eng 2019, 52, 87–97, doi:10.1016/j.ymben.2018.11.004.
55.  Clark, J.B. In Situ Microbial Enhancement of Oil Production. Dev. Ind. Microbiol. 1981, 22, 695–701.
56.  Tsuge,  K.; Akiyama, T.;  Shoda,  M.  Cloning,  Sequencing,  and  Characterization  of  the  Iturin A  Operon.  J  Bacteriol  2001, 
183, 6265–6273, doi:10.1128/JB.183.21.6265-6273.2001.
57.  Sambrook, J.F.; Russell, D. Molecular Cloning: A Laboratory Manual; 3rd ed.; Cold Spring Harbor Lab Press: New York, 
2001; ISBN 978-0-87969-577-4.
58.  Guez, J.-S.; Coutte, F.; Drucbert, A.-S.; Chihib, N.-E.; Danzé, P.-M.; Jacques, P. Resistance of the Cell Wall to Degradation 
Is a Critical Parameter for Isolation of High Quality RNA from Natural Isolates of Bacillus Subtilis. Arch Microbiol 2009, 191, 
669–673, doi:10.1007/s00203-009-0487-6.
59.  Larson, B.J.; Helgren, J.M.; Manolache,  S.O.; Lau, A.Y.;  Lagally, M.G.; Denes, F.S. Cold-Plasma  Modiﬁcation of Oxide 
Surfaces for Covalent Biomolecule Attachment. Biosens Bioelectron 2005, 21, 796–801, doi:10.1016/j.bios.2005.02.005.
60.  Peypoux, F.; Besson, F.; Michel, G.; Delcambe, L. Structure of Bacillomycin D, a New Antibiotic of the Iturin Group. Eur J 
Biochem 1981, 118, 323–327, doi:10.1111/j.1432-1033.1981.tb06405.x.
61.  Miller, L.; Berger, T. Bacteria Identiﬁcation by Gas Chromatography of Whole Cell Fatty Acids. Hewlett Packard applica-
tion note 1985, 228–241.
62.  Chihib, N.-E.; Ribeiro da Silva, M.; Delattre, G.; Laroche, M.; Federighi, M. Different Cellular Fatty Acid Pattern Beha-
viours of Two Strains of Listeria Monocytogenes Scott A and CNL 895807 under Different Temperature and Salinity Conditions. 
FEMS Microbiol Lett 2003, 218, 155–160, doi:10.1111/j.1574-6968.2003.tb11512.x.

