ARViz: Interactive Visualization of Association Rules
for RDF Data Exploration
Aline Menin, Lucie Cadorel, Andrea G. B. Tettamanzi, Alain Giboin, Fabien

Gandon, Marco Winckler

To cite this version:

Aline Menin, Lucie Cadorel, Andrea G. B. Tettamanzi, Alain Giboin, Fabien Gandon, et al.. ARViz:
Interactive Visualization of Association Rules for RDF Data Exploration. IV 2021 - 25th Interna-
tional Conference Information Visualisation, Jul 2021, Melbourne / Virtual, Australia. pp.13-20,
￿10.1109/IV53921.2021.00013￿. ￿hal-03292140￿

HAL Id: hal-03292140

https://hal.science/hal-03292140

Submitted on 20 Jul 2021

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

ARViz: Interactive Visualization of Association
Rules for RDF Data Exploration

1st Aline Menin
University Cˆote d’Azur, Inria, CNRS, I3S (UMR 7271)
France
aline.menin@inria.fr

2nd Lucie Cadorel
University Cˆote d’Azur, Inria, CNRS, I3S (UMR 7271)
France
lucie.cadorel@inria.fr

3rd Andrea Tettamanzi
University Cˆote d’Azur, Inria, CNRS, I3S (UMR 7271)
France
andrea.tettamanzi@inria.fr

4th Alain Giboin
University Cˆote d’Azur, Inria, CNRS, I3S (UMR 7271)
France
alain.giboin@inria.fr

5th Fabien Gandon
University Cˆote d’Azur, Inria, CNRS, I3S (UMR 7271)
France
fabien.gandon@inria.fr

6th Marco Winckler
University Cˆote d’Azur, Inria, CNRS, I3S (UMR 7271)
France
marco.winckler@inria.fr

Abstract—Association rule mining often leads the analyst into
a rough rummaging process to identify rules that are relevant
to understand speciﬁc problems. We propose a visualization
interface to assist the rule selection process and evaluate it on
an RDF knowledge graph derived from the COVID-19 Open
Research Dataset. The user interface supports data exploration
with focus on the overview of rules through a scatter plot,
subsets of rules through a chord diagram chart, and itemsets
through an association graph which is dynamically created by
entering an item of interest (i.e. a named entity). Further, the
analyst can interactively recover a list of publications containing
the named entities involved in a particular rule. Among the
original aspects of our approach, we highlight the representation
of attributes describing measures of interest (i.e. conﬁdence
and interestingness), a visual indication of existence (or not) of
symmetry in association rules, the exploration of subsets of rules
according to clusters of publications and named entities, and an
interactive prompting that aims at expanding the discovery of
named entities within selected association rules. We assess our
approach through a semi-structured interview involving experts
in the domains of data mining and biomedicine, whose feedback
could assist the reﬁnement of the visual and interaction tools.

Index Terms—association rule mining, interactive visualization,

knowledge graph visualization, RDF visualization, COVID-19

I. INTRODUCTION
The widespread use of Linked Open Data (LOD) for pub-
lishing data on the Web has promoted a fast growth of available
data sources that provide access to huge amounts of data ever
more diversiﬁed, which analysis provides valuable information
to support decision-making processes in various application
areas [1]. In the context of the COVID-19 pandemics, for
instance, the whole scientiﬁc community got together in a
common effort to study, understand, and ﬁght the severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), generat-
ing a huge amount of scientiﬁc publications (over 200,000 and

increasing) about coronaviruses and related diseases. Studying
and extracting relevant information from this deluge of data
is impossible without computational power. Thus, there are
multiple efforts towards analyzing and mining the COVID-19
scientiﬁc literature by diverse tools and purposes. A promising
approach [2] consists on using named-entity (NE) linking to
enrich the data by assigning a unique identity to entities (e.g.
locations or diseases) mentioned in the text, which are then
represented through RDF (Resource Description Framework)
knowledge graphs (KGs), a widely used data format to de-
scribe the semantics of real-world entities and their relations,
and to link the descriptions to further information in semantic
LOD repositories [3].

In this paper, we propose an approach to assist the explo-
ration of data from named entities knowledge graphs based
on the joint use of association rule mining and visualization
techniques. The former is a widely used data mining method
to discover interesting correlations, frequent patterns, associ-
ations or casual structures among transactions in a variety
of contexts. An association rule is an implication of the
form X → Y , where X is an antecedent itemset and Y is
a consequent itemset, indicating that transactions containing
items in set X tend to contain items in set Y .

Although the approach helps to reduce and focus the
exploration of large datasets, analysts are still confronted
with the inspection of hundreds of rules in order to grasp
valuable knowledge. Moreover, when extracting association
rules from named entities knowledge graphs, the items are
NEs that form antecedent → consequent links, which the user
should be able to cross to recover information. In this context,
information visualization can help analysts to visually identify
interesting rules that are worthy of further investigation, while

1

providing suitable visual representation to communicate the
relationships between itemsets and association rules. Thus, the
main contributions of this work are:

• A comparative review of existing visualization inter-
faces/techniques for association rule exploration regard-
ing task support;

• A visualization interface to assist

the exploration of
association rules over RDF knowledge graphs and their
measures of interest, supporting tasks of comparison,
identiﬁcation, and overview of items and rules;

• A feature to recover/access the data source (e.g. objects
of the RDF knowledge graph) through named entities
involved in a particular association rule; and

• A formative evaluation of the tools with expert users in

Semantic Web and biomedical research.

The remaining of this document is organized as follows.
Section II surveys previous works on visualization of associa-
tion rules. Section III states the problem while explaining the
association rules mining process embedded in the visualization
pipeline. Section IV presents the design rationale of our ap-
proach and the visualization interface. Section V describes the
evaluation performed with expert users to assess the usability
and suitability of our approach. Section VI discusses the
results and Section VII concludes and unveils the limitations
and future research perspectives.

II. RELATED WORK AND COMPARATIVE REVIEW OF
TECHNIQUES
Based on a comprehensive review of the literature, we
identiﬁed a set of exploratory tasks aimed at assisting analysts
of association rules: i) get an overview of rules available,
ii) identify interesting rules, iii) identify relationship between
items behind rules, iv) identify frequent itemsets, v) compare
rules, and vi) recover detailed information that describe the
rules (e.g. measures of interest, data source, dataset size).
Table I presents the level of support for these exploratory tasks
by the visualizations proposed in previous works.

TABLE I
SUMMARY OF RELATED WORK: TASK SUPPORT BY PROPOSED
VISUALIZATION INTERFACES/TECHNIQUES. LEGEND: APPROPRIATE ,
LIMITED SUPPORT , NO SUPPORT .

Ref. Overview

Interesting
rules

Items
Relations

Frequent
itemsets

Compare
rules

Details on
demand

Type of Task

[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]

Scatter plots in [4] support

the overview of rules and
the identiﬁcation of interesting ones by encoding support
and conﬁdence in the x, y axes, and providing zooming,

2

selection and linking operations to enable users to focus on
a rule or subset of rules. CrystalClear [11] uses a matrix
where rows and columns represent values of conﬁdence and
support, and the cells group rules with equal values of those
measures. While aggregating rules reduces visual cluttering,
gives an overview of the dataset and visually classify rules
it fails on representing
according to measures of interest,
antecedent/consequent items, which prevents the identiﬁcation
of relations between items or itemsets. Also, since every group
of rules, regardless of its size, is encoded through identical
symbols in terms of color and dimensions, it can mislead the
interpretation of rules distribution over measures of interest.
Circular graphs in [5] represent association rules through
line segments, which color (blue-to-yellow gradient) encodes
direction from antecedent to consequent items placed over the
circle’s circumference. Although relations between items are
easily spotted, the technique does not represent measures of
interest hindering the identiﬁcation of interesting rules.

Parallel coordinates plot in [6] represent association rules
through line segments linking items displayed on vertical axes
evenly spaced horizontally. Each rule contains two polylines
connecting antecedent and consequent items, which thickness
and color encode support and conﬁdence, respectively. In [7]
they are combined with a directed graph view, which repre-
sents the relationship among items or rules through directed
links which color and length represent support and conﬁdence,
respectively. In both techniques, the amount of line segments
increases as the number of association rules augments, which
causes visual cluttering and hinder data exploration. Further-
more, one must combine two independent visual coding (color
and length) to identify interesting rules, which could engender
cognitive overhead. The graph view in [13] represents rules
with focus on itemsets, where selection operations allow the
user to highlight rules and to explore smaller subsets of rules
based on frequent itemsets.

A matrix in [8] provides overview of all rules in the dataset
items as rows
by representing antecedent and consequent
and columns, and rules as the intersection cells, which color
(gray scale gradient) encodes the support measure. The matrix
supports scaling and scrolling actions to explore more data
than the screen space allows, and selection operations to deﬁne
subsets of items, which corresponding rules can be further
explored in a graph view. The latter represents the selected
antecedent/consequent items as squares over two vertical axes
and rules as circles over a vertical central axis. Squares and
circles are connected through line segments, which color and
thickness encode rules’ support and conﬁdence, respectively.
In [12] rules a represented via a scatter plot, a matrix and a
graph. The scatter plot displays the distribution of rules over
the intersection of axes encoding support and conﬁdence. The
rows and columns of the matrix correspond to antecedent and
consequent items, while the crossing cells are colored to rep-
resent the lift (a measure of performance) of the rule. Inversely
to how rules are often encoded in graph views, i.e. through
the edges connecting nodes, the authors propose to represent
items and rules as nodes, which color encodes lift values, and

Fig. 1. Sample of the dataset of association rules.

the edges connect the nodes to represent their relationship.
This approach provides an overview of the rules but hinders
the identiﬁcation of itemsets and rules in large datasets, since
no speciﬁc order is imposed to the nodes. Furthermore, the
authors state that only 100 rules may be visualized via the
graph view without cluttering the visualization.

In [9] association rules are represented as vertical line seg-
ments embedded with circular dots connecting antecedent and
consequent items, which are represented through horizontal
lines placed above and below the x-axis. The support of rules
is encoded by the order of vertical lines, which color may
encode conﬁdence or support. This technique favors the explo-
ration of association rules based on an item or itemsets, while
prompting other associated items. However, it cannot visualize
more than a few rules simultaneously. InterVisAr [10] allows
to explore a set of rule at the time, deﬁned by the consequent
item or itemset. The technique is a sort of dynamic bar chart,
which bars change according to a selection operation. These
allow to investigate how conﬁdence and support are affected
by the addition or removal of antecedent items. However,
one cannot explore multiple rules simultaneously, preventing
comparison and discovery of new rules.

Although there are numerous visualization techniques and
interfaces that assist the exploration of association rules, to
the extent of our knowledge there is no technique or interface
that supports the whole set of tasks. In this paper we provide
a visualization interface that combines three visualization
techniques to assist the exploration of association rules that
support these tasks.

III. PROBLEM STATEMENT

A. Data, Dataset and Mining Process

In this study, we analyze the Covid-on-the-Web RDF knowl-
edge graph derived from the 7th version of the CORD-19
corpus [14], which gathers over 50,000 scientiﬁc publications
about COVID-19, SARS-CoV-2, and related coronaviruses.
We focus in one of the several named graphs embedded in the
Covid-on-the-Web: the CORD-19 Named Entities Knowledge
Graph (CORD19-NEKG) that contains named entities identi-
ﬁed and disambiguated by NCBO BioPortal annotator [15],
Wikidata Entity-ﬁshing [16] and DBpedia Spotlight [17].
Using the algorithm proposed in [18], we extract a set of
association rules from the CORD19-NEKG, particularly using
the NEs identiﬁed by Wikidata Entity-ﬁshing tool.

The mining process deﬁnes transactions as publications and
itemsets as named entities, and uses four clustering approaches

(i.e. no clustering, items clustering, transactions clustering, or
both items and transactions clustering), which results in four
sets of association rules. These undergo a ﬁltering process
based on the following criteria: redundancy (i.e. A, B, C → D
is redundant if Conf (A, B → D) ≥ Conf (A, B, C → D)),
minimal conﬁdence (i.e. the probability of ﬁnding the item
Y in a transaction, knowing that the item X is in the same
transaction; threshold of 0.7), and interestingness (threshold of
0.3), which thresholds were empirically chosen based on the
number of resulting rules.

Particularly, the typical support-based approach (i.e. based
on the probability of ﬁnding the items X and Y in a transac-
tion) for association rules mining, which fails on discovering
interesting rules with low support and over-represents itemsets
with high support [18]. Hence, the interestingness measure
helps to determine the serendipity of the rule, which value
is computed based on the rule’s support (Eq. 1) and allows
to penalize rules with high incidence of antecedent and/or
consequent itemsets in the database. For instance, the NE
”virus” appears thousands of times in the dataset and, since the
rules are calculated by the number of co-occurrences between
two named entities in the publications, it will appear in several
rules. However, this information has low relevance for an
expert user since the topic of all articles surrounds a type
of virus. Thus, the algorithm penalizes rules that have the
NE ”virus”, which does not mean deleting: it is possible that
”virus” is associated with a rarer NE, which resulting rule may
have an interestigness measure above the established threshold.

Inter(X → Y ) =

(cid:16) Supp(X→Y )
Supp(X)

(cid:17)

(cid:16) Supp(X→Y )
Supp(Y )

×

(cid:16)

×

1 −

Supp(X→Y )
Total no. of transactions

(cid:17)

(cid:17)

(1)

The resulting data is arranged in a table (see Fig. 1), where
rows correspond to association rules and columns describe
antecedent and consequent itemsets, the support, conﬁdence
and interestingness measures, whether the rule is symmetric,
and the cluster to which the itemsets or transactions belong.

B. Analytical Tasks and Operation Model

The exploratory analyses of association rules are typically
focused on (1) items, used to ﬁnd and/or describe the rules
involving a particular item, or (2) rules, allowing users to (i)
explore distinguishable association rules in a dataset, and (ii)
identify rules that are worth saving for knowledge acquisition.

3

than the other according to the color tendency (i.e. when
color leans to rose, it means that the conﬁdence of the rule
is higher than its interestingness, and when color leans to
green, it indicates otherwise). Finally, the symmetry of rules
is represented through a pattern of white circles.

Fig. 2. Examples of analysis tasks according to selection operations.

A. Overview of Rules

ARViz has three operation types: ﬁltering, sorting, and
hovering. Filtering operations allow users to specify subsets
of interest from the whole input dataset, which supports a
variety of types of tasks such as illustrated in Fig. 2. The user
can deﬁne subsets by selecting: clusters of items, transactions,
or the combination of both, revealing association rules within
set of named entities covering a particular research topic of
interest; a particular item or itemset, which reveal their asso-
ciated items; and measures of conﬁdence and interestingness,
focusing on stronger or weaker rules.

The sorting operations intend to provide quick visual iden-
tiﬁcation of rules or itemsets of interest by sorting named
entities by alphabetic order or according to the number of
associated rules, and rules according to measures of conﬁdence
or interestingness. Finally,
the hovering operations enable
the highlighting of rules or itemsets in each visualization
technique, easing information retrieval.

IV. INTERACTIVE VISUALIZATION

For supporting the above-mentioned tasks, we designed
ARViz (Fig. 3), a visualization interface for association rules
exploration through three synchronized views: a scatter plot
chart, a chord diagram and a directed graph. We follow an
uniformity principle, providing the same visual encoding for
measures of interest and interaction operations across views
to support comfortable and coherent user experience.

Our visualization interface is based on a minimalist design,
which presents one view at the time to maximize screen space
and provides three small lateral buttons to allow the user to
display useful panels to manipulate the data only when needed.
These panels contain the legends of colors and patterns used
for encoding rules (Fig. 3a), the ﬁltering forms allowing the
selection of smaller and meaningful subsets (Fig. 3b), and
the sorting forms allowing the user to modify the order of
how rules and terms are displayed on the chord diagram and
the association graph (Fig. 3c). We use a tab-based display
allowing the user to switch between views: the overview of
rules (Fig. 3d); the circular paginated view of subsets (Fig. 3e);
and the exploratory graph view of items (Fig. 3f).

According to the algorithm used in this study, we visually
encode measures of conﬁdence and interestingness, instead of
support. Since one should interpret both measures together to
determine the interest of a rule, we use a bivariate legend that
combines two color scales: one per measure (Fig. 3a). The
resulting color scale indicates when both measures are high,
medium, and low, and when one of them is more important

Although scatter plots present shortcomings, such as visual
clutter, they remain powerful to visualize rules distribution
over conﬁdence and interestingness. The chart’s x-axis repre-
sents values of interestingness, while the y-axis represents val-
ues of conﬁdence. The crossing points between both measures
are represented by diamond symbols, following our uniformity
principle, which color encodes measures of interest, texture
encodes symmetry, and size encodes the number of rules for
each pair < conf idence, interestingness > (Fig. 4). Often,
the dataset contains sets of rules with the same measure of
conﬁdence and interestingness, which only part is symmetric.
Thus, we place the diamonds representing symmetric rules on
the top of the set of non-symmetric rules. To prevent mis-
interpretation of information, we provide a tooltip over each
diamond displaying the actual number of rules represented,
the values of measures of interest, and whether the rules are
symmetric or not.

B. Circular Paginated View of Subsets

Circular graphs provide an alternative to complex matrices
as the connections between itemsets can be represented by
arrows, guiding user’s attention. Thus, we propose the circular
paginated view of subsets (Fig. 5) to assist the exploration
of subsets of rules and the resolution of rule-based tasks.
Since the antecedent and consequent sides of association rules
can contain more than one item, we adapted the traditional
implementation of the diagram to merge multiple ribbons
into one or fork one ribbon into multiple ones. The order
of arcs around the circumference can be modiﬁed by sorting
the named entities by alphabetic order or according to the
number of association rules involving each item. The latter
provides a cleaner view of rules, since the items within the
most association rules tend to be related to items that are
themselves associated to a large number of rules. Thus, the
items will be closely placed reducing the number of ribbons
crossing each other.

Displaying a number of rules higher than a certain threshold
would clutter the visualization causing overhead when distin-
guishing colors to determine the conﬁdence, interestingness
and symmetry of rules. Therefore, we adopted a “pagination”
approach (Fig. 5b) that allows users to browse over subsets of
a given number of rules determined and customizable by the
user at any time. The same method can be used to browse rules
based on subsets of items (e.g. explore the rules involving a
subset of 20 items). The technique can display up to 150 rules
without cluttering the visualization, i.e. still supporting visual
identiﬁcation of interesting rules.

4

Fig. 3.
Interactive visualization: the buttons in the top left corner allow to access panels to view the legend (a), the data ﬁltering (b) and sorting (c). The
interface embeds 3 visualizations: a scatter plot to provide overview of rules (d); a chord diagram to provide a paginated exploration of subsets of rules (e);
and an association graph to provide an exploratory view of items (f).

Fig. 4. A scatter plot gives an overview of all the rules while serving as
ﬁltering tool to enable the exploration of subsets of rules through the circular
paginated view.

C. The Association Graph View

Association graphs (Fig. 6) give an intuitive portray of
antecedent and consequent items involved in rules by repre-
senting them as nodes placed in the left and right side of rules.
In our design, we represent items over two vertical stacks
of labeled rectangles at the left and right extremities of the
window, and rules as diamond-shaped nodes placed at the
center of the visualization space. The bootstrapping process
of the association graph view depends on a trigger action of
the user, described hereafter.

Upon selection of an item from the antecedent/conse-
quent lists, the selected item and its related items are placed
on the top of the list (Fig. 6b-c), followed by the remaining
items available in the dataset (Fig. 6d), colored in gray to indi-
cate their disconnection with the visible rules. Upon choosing

Fig. 5. The circular view: arcs encode single items and ribbons represent
the rules connecting them, which color encodes conﬁdence, interestingness,
and symmetry. The arrowhead of ribbons (a) encodes the rule direction and
points the consequent item. The browsing panel (b) allows to modify the size
of subsets and browse between them.

an item via the search bar (Fig. 6a), the system will display
the selected and its related items on the corresponding side
and display the associated rules. This process is also triggered
upon the choice of an item via a context menu embedded
on the arcs of the circular view. Continuous interaction is
available enabling the user to click on any of the visible items
(including the ones in gray), triggering a re-positioning and
re-coloring of items. Furthermore, the segments between the

5

b) Data Filteringa) Legendc) Data Sortingd) Overview of Rulesf) Exploratory Graph View of Items e) Circular Paginated View of Subsetsb)a)vertical axis of antecedent/consequent and the rules contain
a black dot indicating the union of two or more items as an
itemset acting as antecedent/consequent (Fig. 6e).

Fig. 6. The association graph view: (a) the search bars to ﬁnd NEs; (b) the
selected antecedent NE; (c) other NEs embedded in the antecedent of rules
containing the selected NE; (d) the list of remaining antecedent NEs available
in the dataset; (e) junction dots linking items belonging to the same itemset;
(f) the color-encoded shapes representing the rules associating both antecedent
and consequent NEs; and (g) the consequent NEs of selected rules.

D. Details-on-Demand and Data Source Information

Fig. 7. Hovering the ribbons (left) in the circular view and nodes (right) in
the graph view highlights the corresponding rule coloring the remaining in
gray, while popping up a tooltip with details about the hovered rule and a
button for recovering a list of publications related to the involved items.

Details-on-demand is provided through hovering over rules
(i.e. ribbons or diamonds), which highlights the object and
displays a tooltip that presents detailed information regarding
the rule and the involved items, including of textual description
of the measures conﬁdence, support, and interestingness, and
the name of corresponding the cluster (Fig. 7a). Furthermore,
upon clicking on a rule, detailed information about the data
source is displayed in an adjacent window (Fig. 7b). Since
we are dealing with a dataset describing association rules
within named entities identiﬁed in publications, the window
lists the publications related to the named entities of the rule.
We provide information on the title, authors, publication year,
and the digital object identiﬁer (DOI) of the publication. This
feature allows the analyst to (1) consult the source of the

6

visualized information, and (2) expand the description and
understanding of association rules with contextual information.

E. Interactive synchronization

The three proposed views are independent but synchronized
in a way that users may select subsets of data (rules or items)
in one views to explore in another. The scatter plot embeds
interactive features to enable the visual ﬁltering of rules and
their exploration on the circular paginated view of subsets.
A context menu embedded in each diamond symbol allows
users to select the set of rules represented to explore on the
circular view. From the circular paginated view of subsets,
the user may switch to the association graph view through a
context menu embedded in each arc, which allow the user to
choose to explore the rules involving that item when it is in
the antecedent or consequent side of rules.

F. Interactive prompting

The system also includes an interactive prompting func-
tionality to help users discover rules. In the association graph
view, when the user searches for a NE in the search bar, the
system displays all rules involving that NE and it prompts
the user to rules involving every other NE pertaining the
antecedent/consequent itemsets. Similarly, in the circular view,
further to the rules within the selected NEs,
the system
displays rules which part of NEs pertain the selection. This
feature enables the user to discover what other NEs are related
to the searched item and to browse those “related” rules and
NEs expanding the analysis.

V. QUALITATIVE EVALUATION WITH DOMAIN EXPERTS

We conducted semi-structured interviews of about one hour
via video-conference calls with two independent experts (over
15 years of experience), one from the the domains of data
mining and another from biomedicine, who assessed the
feasibility and usability of ARViz through the resolution of
a set of domain-related tasks.

A. Material and Methods

Before starting the interview, the participants signed a Terms
and Conditions agreement authorizing us to anonymously use
their data in this study. The interview started with an overall
exposition of the visual and interactive tools, and their objec-
tives. The participant answered a standard socio-demographic
questionnaire comprising standard proﬁling questions.

During a learning phase, the experimenter demonstrated
the process of solving an analytic task using the interface,
which the participant had to repeat afterwards with supervision
of the experimenter. In the trial phase, the participants were
asked to perform by themselves four sets of analytic tasks
using the visualization interface. After completing each task
the participants were asked to rate the difﬁculty of the tasks
from 1 (very difﬁcult) to 5 (very easy). During both phases, the
participant would share their screen to allow the experimenter
to follow their actions while performing the tasks. Comments
uttered by the users were collected using thinking aloud
protocol and duly recorded.

b)a)In the post-test phase, the participants answered a set of
questions rating the importance of representing certain data
information (e.g., measures of interest, source of data, etc) and
providing certain interactive features (e.g., ﬁltering, sorting,
etc) in a 5-point Likert scale. We used the well-known System
Usability Scale (SUS) [19] questionnaire to evaluate usability
aspects. We also assessed the workload engendered by our
tools through the Raw NASA-TLX (Task Load Index) [20]
(RTLX) questionnaire, a multi-dimensional rating procedure
that provides an overall workload score based on the average
of ratings of six workload-related factors: mental demand,
physical demand, temporal demand, own performance, effort,
and frustration.

B. Results

Both participants solved all

the tasks and assessed the
solving process as easy or very easy. We observed that P1
solved all tasks only using the circular view, even though they
seemed to understand the distinct roles of each view during the
learning phase, while expressing to ﬁnd particularly important
the context menu in the circular view allowing to launch the
association graph view for a particular item. P1 also never
used the browsing tool to create subsets of items, only rules,
which misled the answer of the following task: “Identify the
three terms with the most association rules”. By browsing rules
without a particular order, P1 focused on the displayed items
with the most rules, which are not necessarily the ones with
the most associated rules in the dataset.

to represent

Both participants found very important

the
connection between antecedent and consequent items, and the
measures of interest. They also considered very important to
ﬁlter the data according to items, clusters and measures of
interest. They assessed as important to show related items to
the searched one, but they do not ﬁnd it an essential feature
(score of 4/5). P2 found very important to show the clear
relationship between items, the symmetry of rules, the source
of data, and sorting rules and NEs, while P1 considered it
important but not essential. Particularly, P1 mentioned that
sorting rules and NEs would be necessary only for tasks such
as “ﬁnd the most conﬁdent or interesting rules”, while being
less useful to other types of tasks.

The overall RTLX scores showed that the perceived work-
load was slightly higher for P1 than P2, which scores were 55
and 46.7, respectively. P1 associated the physical demand to
the action of positioning the cursor on the elements since, in
P1’s opinion, some of them were too small. P1 also assessed
his own performance with higher score than P2, which might
be associated to how they have previously assessed the success
of their tasks. The SUS scores were 85 and 87.5 points
for P1 and P2, respectively, which according to the Curved
Grading Scale [21], indicates that they found the usability
to be excellent. Both participants agreed that most people
would not learn to use the system very quickly, which P2
believes to be due to the vocabulary we used in the interface
(e.g., association rules, symmetry, etc). These concepts are
particularly familiar to people working in the ﬁeld of data

7

mining, but not for people in other domains such as researchers
in biomedicine, which are the second type of potential users
of our visualization while applied to the COVID-19 scientiﬁc
literature. P2 also found it difﬁcult to understand the meaning
of clusters and how to use them.

Both participants appreciated the link between the circular
and association graph views, since that allows them to directly
explore a NE of interest. Particularly, P2 appreciated the
minimalist and organized design of the association graph and
the interactive prompting, since that enable them to extend the
analysis to NEs that they have not thought about before.

VI. DISCUSSION
We presented ARViz1, a visual approach designed to assist
the rummaging process of association rules extracted from
RDF knowledge graphs.

Analytical tasks. We propose three ways to approach the
resolution of tasks based on association rules: the ﬁrst one
is an overview of all rules through a scatter plot (e.g., give
the distribution of association rules according to conﬁdence
and interestingness); the second way is through a paginated
exploration of subsets of rules using a chord diagram chart
(e.g.,
identify the relationships between items or itemsets
within a particular subset of rules or items); the third way
is through an association graph that focus on itemsets (e.g.,
identify the rules associated to a particular NE). These views
and tasks are complementary to allow a complete exploration
the rules. The chord diagram and the association graph support
the recovering of publications covering the named entities
involved in a particular rule, which provides contextual infor-
mation that allows to expand the analysis and to understand
the relationship between named entities.

Visual design and interactions. We combined three com-
plementary visualization techniques while improving the vi-
sual representation of attributes describing conﬁdence, inter-
estingness and symmetry of rules, which were only partially
covered in previous works, specially in the visualization ap-
proach using a circular graph presented in [5]. We propose
ﬁltering criteria to allow the exploration of subsets of rules
according to clusters of publications and named entities, or
a selection of named entities of interest. We also provide an
interactive prompting to assist the discovery of named entities
within selected association rules by suggesting to the user
related named entities to the one they searched.

Usability and suitability. The semi-structured interviews
with two expert strongly suggest
that our approach is an
effective tool for assisting the exploration of association rules.
The experts suggested that a pedagogic approach should be
adopted to introduce the system to lay users in data mining,
allowing them to apply the tool in their working routine to
better understand and establish the relationship between named
entities of interest. Nonetheless, the high degree of success in
the execution of tasks and overall feeling that task as easy/very
easy to perform with our tools, demonstrate that the approach

1Accessible at http://covid19.i3s.unice.fr:8080/arviz/

[3] C. Bizer, T. Heath, and T. Berners-Lee, “Linked data: The story so far,”
in Semantic services, interoperability and web applications: emerging
concepts.

IGI global, 2011, pp. 205–227.

[4] A. Unwin, H. Hofmann, and K. Bernt, “The twokey plot for multiple
association rules control,” in European Conference on Principles of Data
Mining and Knowledge Discovery. Springer, 2001, pp. 472–483.
[5] C. P. Rainsford and J. F. Roddick, “Visualisation of temporal interval
association rules,” in International Conference on Intelligent Data
Engineering and Automated Learning. Springer, 2000, pp. 91–96.
[6] L. Yang, “Visualizing frequent itemsets, association rules, and sequential
patterns in parallel coordinates,” in International Conference on Com-
putational Science and Its Applications. Springer, 2003, pp. 21–30.
[7] D. Bruzzese and P. Buono, “Combining visual techniques for associ-
ation rules exploration,” in Proceedings of the working conference on
Advanced visual interfaces, 2004, pp. 381–384.

[8] Y. A. Sekhavat and O. Hoeber, “Visualizing association rules using

linked matrix, graph, and detail views,” 2013.

[9] K. Techapichetvanich and A. Datta, “Visar: a new technique for visual-
izing mined association rules,” in International Conference on Advanced
Data Mining and Applications. Springer, 2005, pp. 88–95.

[10] C.-W. Cheng, Y. Sha, and M. D. Wang, “Intervisar: An interactive
visualization for association rule search,” in Proc. 7th ACM International
Conference on Bioinformatics, Computational Biology, and Health In-
formatics, 2016, pp. 175–184.

[11] K. huat Ong, K. leong Ong, W.-K. Ng, and E.-P. Lim, “Crystalclear:
Active visualization of association rules,” in In ICDM’02 International
Workshop on Active Mining AM2002. Press, 2002.

[12] M. Hahsler, “arulesviz: Interactive visualization of association rules with

r.” R Journal, vol. 9, no. 2, 2017.

[13] C. H. Yamamoto, M. C. F. de Oliveira, and S. O. Rezende, “Visual-
ization to assist the generation and exploration of association rules,” in
Post-Mining of Association Rules: Techniques for Effective Knowledge
Extraction.

IGI, 2009, pp. 224–245.

[14] L. L. Wang, K. Lo, Y. Chandrasekhar, R. Reas, J. Yang, D. Burdick,
D. Eide, K. Funk, Y. Katsis, R. Kinney, Y. Li, Z. Liu, W. Merrill,
P. Mooney, D. Murdick, D. Rishi, J. Sheehan, Z. Shen, B. Stilson,
A. Wade, K. Wang, N. X. R. Wang, C. Wilhelm, B. Xie, D. Raymond,
D. S. Weld, O. Etzioni, and S. Kohlmeier, “CORD-19: The COVID-19
Open Research Dataset,” arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2004.10706, 2020.

[15] M. A. Musen, N. F. Noy, N. H. Shah, P. L. Whetzel, C. G. Chute, M.-
A. Story, B. Smith, and N. team, “The national center for biomedical
ontology,” Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association,
vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 190–195, 2012.

[16] L. Foppiano and L. Romary, “entity-ﬁshing: a DARIAH entity recogni-
tion and disambiguation service,” in Digital Scholarship in the Human-
ities , Tokyo, Japan, Sep. 2018.

[17] J. Daiber, M. Jakob, C. Hokamp, and P. N. Mendes, “Improving
efﬁciency and accuracy in multilingual entity extraction,” in Proc. 9th
International Conference on Semantic Systems, 2013, pp. 121–124.
[18] L. Cadorel and A. G. B. Tettamanzi, “Mining RDF Data of COVID-19
Scientiﬁc Literature for Interesting Association Rules,” in International
Joint Conference on Web Intelligence and Intelligent Agent Technology
(WI-IAT’20), 2020, p. to appear.

[19] J. Brooke, “Sus: a ’quick and dirty’ usability,” Usability evaluation in

industry, p. 189, 1996.

[20] S. G. Hart, “Nasa-task load index (nasa-tlx); 20 years later,” in Pro-
ceedings of the human factors and ergonomics society annual meeting,
vol. 50, no. 9.
Sage publications Sage CA: Los Angeles, CA, 2006,
pp. 904–908.

[21] J. Sauro and J. R. Lewis, Quantifying the user experience: Practical

statistics for user research. Morgan Kaufmann, 2016.

is feasible for solving domain-related tasks. Further studies are
needed to evaluate the interface with a larger sample of expert
users to conﬁrm these hypotheses.

Generalization. Although this paper covers data describing
the COVID-19 scientiﬁc literature, the visualization interface
could handle any dataset of association rules regardless the
underlying subject. Every feature can be equally used for
other datasets and they can be easily adapted to encode
different measures of interest. However, for data covering a
completely different subject (e.g., products in a supermarket),
the details-on-demand would have to be adapted offering
further information (e.g., products description or supermarkets
containing the selected products).

VII. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK

We presented an interactive visualization to assist the explo-
ration of association rules. It was evaluated on rules extracted
from a dataset describing the COVID-19 scientiﬁc literature.
Our approach employs a scatter plot, a chord diagram, and an
association graph to support overview of rules, and rule- and
item-based analytic tasks. We represent attributes describing
conﬁdence, interestingness and symmetry of rules, and support
the exploration of subsets of rules according to clustering
results. The visualization of these attributes related to rules
is original in the literature of data mining. We also provide
an interactive prompting that aims to assist the discovery of
named entities within selected association rules. Further, we
allow the user to recover the publications covering the NEs
involved in a particular association rule. A complementary
approach such as ours for exploring association rules is totally
novel in the literature.

Based on the feedback from expert users, we conclude that
the results are encouraging, since participants from both data
mining and biomedicine domains solved all proposed tasks
with success and judged excellent the usability of the user
interface. Future work includes the dissemination of the tool
to researchers working with publication related to the COVID-
19. In a longer run, we expect to redesign the visualization
pipeline to support different RDF datasets and process them
through the mining algorithm that extract the association rules
to be visualized with our interface.

VIII. ACKNOWLEDGMENT

We acknowledge Inria for funding the CovidOnTheWeb
project2, in the context of which this research was conducted.
We would also like to thank the participants of the experiment
for allowing us to borrow their valuable time and knowledge.

REFERENCES

[1] F. Gandon, “A Survey of the First 20 Years of Research on Seman-
tic Web and Linked Data,” Revue des Sciences et Technologies de
l’Information, Dec. 2018.

[2] F. Michel, F. Gandon, V. Ah-Kane, A. Bobasheva, E. Cabrio, O. Corby,
R. Gazzotti, S. Marro, T. Mayer, M. Simon, S. Villata, and M. Winckler,
“Covid-on-the-web: Knowledge graph and services to advance covid-19
research,” 09 2020.

2https://www.inria.fr/en/covid-web

8

