Making the Right Move to Senior Researcher: some
challenges and hints
Patrick Valduriez

To cite this version:

Patrick Valduriez. Making the Right Move to Senior Researcher: some challenges and hints. SIGMOD
record, 2021, 50 (2), pp.30-32. ￿10.1145/3484622.3484628￿. ￿lirmm-03240377v2￿

HAL Id: lirmm-03240377

https://hal-lirmm.ccsd.cnrs.fr/lirmm-03240377v2

Submitted on 16 May 2022

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

Making the Right Move to Senior Researcher: some challenges and hints 

Patrick Valduriez 

Inria, University of Montpellier, CNRS, LIRMM, France

I  have  been  working  on  research  in  data  management 
for  the  last  40  years.  I  like  my  job  and  my  research 
institution (Inria, the French national research institute 
for  computer  science),  which  have  offered  me  great 
opportunities to learn a lot, do good work, get to know 
smart and nice people and overall feel useful. However, 
since  the  early  days  of  my  mid-career,  the  research 
environment,  including  academia  and  industry,  has 
certainly become more complex, making the move from 
junior  (or  pre-tenure)  researcher  to  senior  researcher 
quite  challenging.  Based  on  my  experience,  I  review 
some  of  the  main  questions  and  challenges  and  give 
some hints on how to deal with them. I’ll sometimes use 
stories and anecdotes to illustrate the point. 

Let’s start with a basic question: why do you want to do 
(or keep doing) research? This is an important question 
you  should  reflect  on,  since  research  requires  major 
personal  investment.  I  have  heard  many  different 
answers, e.g., I want to make the world a better place, I 
like  the  freedom  given  by  my  job,  it  is  fun  (e.g., 
programming), I want to be the best, … Whatever your 
reason  is,  the  motivation  must  be  very  strong  and 
profound (not just guided by your ego), in particular, to 
deal with ups and downs in funding, projects and results. 
The  question  may  also  help  you  to  consider  careers 
outside of research. After all, if you survived as a junior 
researcher,  you  have  developed  proficiencies  such  as 
creativity, autonomy, rigor, reliability, communication, 
etc., which will be invaluable in many other domains.  

The first challenge in rising to a senior researcher is the 
necessary shift from “woodcutter” to “forester”. In the 
mid  1980s,  as  a  junior  researcher  at  Microelectronics 
(Austin, 
and  Computer  Technology  Corporation 
Texas), during one of my yearly performance reviews, 
my boss said to me something like: “So far, you have 
been a great woodcutter, taking one problem after the 
other and giving it a nice solution. But it is now time to 
move on as a forester, looking at the overall forest, so 
you can choose the best trees by yourself.” This was a 

great advice, which required a radical shift in the way to 
do research. A junior researcher is often given research 
directions  to  work  on,  with  full  control  over  the 
solutions  and  implementation  details.  The  shift  to 
becoming a forester requires working on problems for 
which you may not have all the knowledge and skills to 
solve.  Thus,  you  will  have  to  learn  new  scientific 
methods and move outside of your comfort zone. You 
should also work with experts from other fields, which 
requires much humility and patience as you realize they 
know so much more in their field. 

The next challenge is to shape a research agenda. This 
is  the  hard  part  as  a  serious  project  typically  involves 
several other researchers and students, so you will also 
have to turn into a team leader. You may also choose to 
work on several unrelated projects, which will be even 
harder  as  it  may  lead  to  dispersion  of  attention  and 
effort.  I’ve  always  preferred  to  focus  on  a  single, 
ambitious (high-risk) project, perhaps decomposed into 
several  smaller  projects,  as  it  yields  more  overall 
coherence  and  synergy  between  people  working  on 
different  pieces.  A  good  example  is  building  a  new 
database  system  (a  big  project),  with  smaller  projects 
such as query engine, transaction manager and storage 
engine. 

There  are  two  approaches  to  come  up  with  a  project: 
reactive  and  proactive.  The  reactive  approach,  e.g., 
proposing a project to answer a call for funding, is easier 
as  most  of  the  burden  of  identifying  the  research 
directions may have been done by the people who wrote 
the  call,  but  may  not  benefit  from  all  your  creative 
potential. The proactive approach is harder as you need 
to  identify  a  real,  challenging  problem  that  you  can 
solve. This may take time, talking to many people, e.g., 
close colleagues as well as people from applications and 
industry, to understand the domain and state of the art. 
For  instance,  to  come  up  with  my  Zenith  project  on 
scientific data management, I spent much time talking 
to colleagues in machine learning and data mining, as 
well as to scientists, e.g., plant biologists, to understand 

ACM SIGMOD Record, 50(2):30-32, 2021. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
their requirements in data management. The proactive 
approach  yields  more  freedom  than  the  reactive 
approach,  as  you  are  not  bound  by  specific  calls,  and 
may  have  higher  impact,  e.g.,  by  setting  a  completely 
new research direction. And you can either find generic 
calls for funding, or apply to specific calls by adapting 
the project to fit in. 

To lead the team in charge of the project, you will need 
to  develop  management  skills.  This  takes  time  as  just 
taking a management class is not going to be enough. 
You will also have to learn how to deal with smart but 
very different people and have them work together as a 
unified  body.  Books  and  courses  will  help,  but  real 
experience will be critical. At the same time, you should 
be careful not to lose technical skills, which are useful 
to communicate with the other researchers, students and 
engineers who will do the actual work. One way to do 
this  is  to  take  your  share  in  the  project  development, 
e.g.,  do  programming,  which  may  be  challenging  but 
also fun. In a world controlled by technology, technical 
skills  will  always  be  an  asset  to  realizing  your  own 
vision and not to be fooled by techie woodcutters. Many 
years ago, I was teaching databases at a top engineering 
school in Paris (a so-called “grande école” in France). A 
student was complaining that it was too technical, which 
is true: databases is a very technical subject. So, I asked: 
“But aren’t you supposed to learn engineering, which is 
quite technical?”. And the student gave me that answer: 
“Yes, but I want to be a manager”.  Then, I continued 
with the advice I just gave you. 

Having  a  great  research  project  is  a  first  step,  but  not 
enough  as  you  will  also  need  the  right  people  with 
complementary  expertise  to  help  you  along  the  way. 
Within your organization, collaborating with colleagues 
from  other  teams  will  be  much  more  productive  and 
more  pleasant  than  competition.  It  will  also  save  you 
much pain and time lost in all kinds of useless fights. 
Collaboration  is  also  more  and  more  international, 
leveraging  diversity  of  ideas,  practices  and  resources. 
International cooperation is also a good way to obtain 
funding, e.g., the European Commission is instrumental 
in  supporting  big  projects  in  several  countries,  even 
outside Europe. Furthermore, some research institutions 
have  very  strong  international  programs,  e.g.,  Inria’s 
associated team program that funds tight collaboration 
with a foreign team for up to five years. To succeed in 

ACM SIGMOD Record, 50(2):30-32, 2021. 

collaboration,  you  must  develop  a  solid  network  of 
collaborators,  both  within 
and  outside  your 
organization, and keep nurturing it. This takes time and 
patience as you will have to learn to work with different 
people.  In  the  long  run,  it  is  very  rewarding  and 
pleasant, and some collaborators become best friends. 

Once  you  have  the  right  project  and  the  right  people, 
you  need  to  produce  results,  yet  another  major 
challenge.  I  advise  producing  high-quality  papers, 
always  favoring  quality  and  long-term  impact  over 
quantity.  Thus,  it  is  best  to  avoid  the  LPU  (least 
publishable unit) strategy. Not only does it generate just 
too  many  papers  to  get  read  and  referenced,  it  is  also 
counter-productive  if  you  look  for  promotion  at  a 
serious research institution, where for instance, you will 
be asked to give your top 5 papers that will get read by 
the selection committee. Publishing impactful papers is 
hard and takes time, as extensive validation and often 
reproducible results are required. Producing software is 
also important, not only to validate the research results 
but to deliver artefacts that other researchers can use and 
build  on,  e.g.,  open-source  software.  Some  highly 
successful projects even go the extra mile of creating a 
user community around the software, with much long-
term impact. For instance, the Ingres DBMS project at 
UC Berkeley in the mid-1970s has been the basis for the 
PostgreSQL  community 
thousands  of 
developers  today.  Another  example  is  the  Pl@nNet 
platform for plant identification developed in my Zenith 
team with plant scientists from other French institutions 
(CIRAD,  INRAe  and  IRD),  which  has  millions  of 
mobile phone end-users world-wide. 

that  has 

A final challenge is to be a role model for people around 
you, which means behaving ethically. The ACM Code 
of Ethics and Professional Conduct is an excellent guide 
for ethical decision-making. In a world that is more and 
more  controlled  by  algorithms  and  data  science,  it  is 
important to act responsibly, with a good understanding 
of the impact of our work on people’s lives and planet 
Earth.  This  raises  many  questions  on  how  to  make 
algorithmic  decision-making  fair,  accountable  and 
transparent  (FAT),  as  discussed  at  the  VLDB  2018 
panel on data and algorithmic ethics. 

Let me end with the common issue of searching for the 
elusive  perfect  place  to  do  research.  I  have  met  many 

 
 
 
 
 
 
researchers  during  my  career  who,  even  though  they 
were relatively happy with their job and organization, 
were always looking for the next better place. Of course, 
there  are  many  good  places,  both  in  academia  and 
industry, and doing the right move at the right time, e.g., 
at  the  end  of  a  project,  should  be  quite  beneficial  for 
your career. However, searching for the perfect place to 
work may be endless and illusive. Let me illustrate with 
this  nice  tale.  There  was  an  old  man  sitting  at  the 
entrance of a city. A stranger comes and asks: “I have 
never been to this city; what are the people who live here 
like?” The old man replies: “How were the people in the 
city  you  came  from?”  The  stranger  says:  “Selfish  and 
mean. That's why I left.” The old man continues: “You 
will find the same here.” A little later, another stranger 
approaches and asks: “I have just arrived, tell me what 
are the people who live in this city like.” The old man 
replies:  “How  were  the  people  in  the  city  you  came 
from?”  The  stranger  says:  “They  were  good  and 
welcoming.  I  had  many  friends.”  The  old  man  says: 
“You will find the same here.” Someone who watched 
the  scene  asks:  “How  can  you  give  two  completely 
different answers to the same question?” The old man 
replies:  “Well,  each  of  us  carries  its  own  universe.” 
Thus, you may want to consider changing the way you 
look  at  your  current  situation,  before  considering 
moving to the next place. 

ACM SIGMOD Record, 50(2):30-32, 2021. 

 
