STMotif Explorer: A Tool for Spatiotemporal Motif
Analysis
Heraldo Borges, Antonio Castro, Cassio Souza, Jorge Rodrigues, Fábio André

Machado Porto, Rafaelli Coutinho, Esther Pacitti, Eduardo Ogasawara

To cite this version:

Heraldo Borges, Antonio Castro, Cassio Souza, Jorge Rodrigues, Fábio André Machado Porto, et al..
STMotif Explorer: A Tool for Spatiotemporal Motif Analysis. SBBD 2023 – Simpósio Brasileiro de
Banco de Dados, SBC, Sep 2023, Belo Honrizonte, Brazil. ￿lirmm-04283828v2￿

HAL Id: lirmm-04283828

https://hal-lirmm.ccsd.cnrs.fr/lirmm-04283828v2

Submitted on 15 Nov 2023

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

STMotif Explorer: A Tool for Spatiotemporal Motif Analysis

Heraldo Borges
CEFET/RJ
heraldo.borges@cefet-rj.br

Antonio Castro
CEFET/RJ
antonio.castro@eic.cefet-rj.br

Fabio Porto
LNCC
fporto@lncc.br

Rafaelli Coutinho
CEFET/RJ
rafaelli.coutinho@cefet-rj.br

Esther Pacitti
University of Montpellier & INRIA
Esther.Pacitti@lirmm.fr

Eduardo Ogasawara
CEFET/RJ
eogasawara@ieee.org

Abstract

Pattern discovery is an important task in time series mining. A pattern that occurs a significant num-
ber of times in a time series is called a motif. Several approaches have been developed to discover
motifs in time series. However, we can observe a clear gap in exploring the spatial-time series data.
It is challenging to understand and characterize the meaning of the motif obtained concerning the
data domain, comparing different approaches and analyzing the quality of the results obtained. We
propose STMotif Explorer, a spatial-time motif analysis system that aims to interactively discover
and visualize spatial-time motifs in different domains, offering insight to users. STMotif Explorer
enables users to use and implement novel spatiotemporal motif detection techniques and then run
this across various domains. Besides, STMotif Explorer offers the users a set of interactive resources
where it is possible to visualize and analyze the discovered motifs and compare the results from
different techniques. We show the features of our system with different approaches using real data.

Keywords Motif discovery · Spatial-Time · Visualization

1

Introduction

Pattern discovery has become increasingly challenging in sensor and IoT data [12, 8]. In this context, a motif is a
particular pattern that we can understand as a subsequence that occurs a significant number of times in time series [11,
6]. Relevant time series phenomena present different behaviors when analyzed in space and time. These phenomena
are best modeled as space-time series, where each time series is associated with a position in space [10]. In this
context, the motifs are specified in space and time and might not be discovered when we only analyze the temporal
dimension. Discovering motifs becomes challenging when we look at the spatiotemporal series [2]. This problem is
challenging for many reasons:
Traditional approaches are not effective for spatiotemporal data. To find out spatiotemporal motifs, it is necessary to
identify regions of space and time in which they are frequent. Traditional approaches are inefficient as they identify
motifs only in the temporal dimension, excluding those more spatially distributed. Finding and analyzing spatiotem-
poral motifs may enable us to understand how the phenomenon behaves [2].

Lack of spatiotemporal motif discovery tools. Some tools, such as VizTree [5] and GrammarViz [9], were developed for
the discovery and visualization of motifs in time series. These tools are not suitable for working with spatiotemporal
data. Besides, they are not modular, i.e., they do not enable the development, execution, and comparison of other
approaches in the same environment.

Spatiotemporal motif visualization tools. Discovered spatial-time motifs visualization and their distributions over
space and time can bring new insights. Some initiatives work with the spatiotemporal approach to identify motifs in
the trajectory data [7] but focus on analyzing moving objects. It excludes works investigating phenomena that occur
at each position throughout time, where the sensors are fixed.

preprint

It is essential to create tools enabling data scientists to interact with spatial-temporal motif discovery systems to address
the abovementioned challenges. In this demo, we present STMotif Explorer, a visual tool we developed. In addition to
enabling interaction with discovered motifs, the tool provides the user with an interactive process where it is possible
to register discovery algorithms following a canonical data structure and execute these with registered data. These
features open up several opportunities, enabling us to compare and view motif discovery functions and see the results
in the same environment.

Besides this introduction, the paper is organized into four more sections. Section 2 provides the background. Section
3 describes the STMotif Explorer. Section 4 presents the demonstration scenario. Finally, Section 5 provides the
conclusion.

2 Spatiotemporal Motif Discovery and Visualization

Borges et al. [2] proposed the Combined Series Approach (CSA), i.e., an approach to discover and rank motifs in
spatial-time series. CS A is organized in three main steps: (i) normalization & SAX indexing; (ii) discovery of spatial-
time motifs; (iii) ranking of spatial-time motifs. CS A is summarized in Algorithm 1. It takes as input a spatial-time
series dataset S , a word size w, an alphabet size a, sb and tb corresponding to spatial and temporal block sizes, and
spatiotemporal constraints σ and κ.

Algorithm 1 Combined Series Approach
1: function CS A(S , w, a, sb, tb, σ, κ)
S ← normS AX(S , a)
2:
S T Moti f s ← discoverS T Moti f s(S , w, sb, tb, σ, κ)
3:
rS T Moti f s ← rankS T Moti f s(S T Moti f s)
4:
return rS T Moti f s
5:

Visual time series exploration has been extensively studied [4]. However, we find a very restricted bibliography for
approaches to motif visualization in space-time series. From them, some missing features are: (i) rank and view
space-time motifs to shed light on the most important ones; (ii) compare different approaches over different datasets;
(iii) evaluate the motifs found compared to ground truths.

3 STMotif Explorer

We developed STMotif Explorer based on the following objectives: (i) spatial-time motifs visualization; (ii) modular-
ity; and (iii) comparison of results. Regarding visualization, the goal is to provide an interactive environment where
users can view and explore the motifs discovered in a spatiotemporal dataset. Such interactivity enables a deeper
investigation of discovered patterns.

The modularity enables users to register and execute their spatial-time motif detection and ranking algorithms using a
canonical data structure. The tool can view and save the results obtained from this processing. Besides the algorithms,
it will also be possible to register new spatiotemporal databases, even those with ground-truth results, which the motif
discovery algorithms can use. Finally, the comparison feature lets us view Spatial-Temporal Motif Discovery (STMD)
algorithms relative to ground truth data. It can be used for performance comparison in a single environment. The tool
provides data visualization and statistics of the results.

To provide all these features, we designed STMotif Explorer into two main parts depicted in Figure 1.a. The API
provides the means to register the algorithms and data to the system. Besides enabling the execution of the registered
algorithms, the interface provides functionalities for visual interaction with the data and the results. The interface
also provides ways to compare the obtained results. The core algorithms behind the tool are implemented using the R
language.

3.1 STMotif Explorer: API

The API enables users to interact with the infrastructure through three components.

Register Algorithm and Rank Functions. The system architecture is modular, enabling the addition of new algo-
rithms for execution through the interface. The user can register new functions for motif discovery and ranking. The
canonical data structure STMotifDS was defined to ease the parameterization of the functions and subsequent com-
parison of the obtained results. This structure is made up of Motifs information, with the positions of its occurrences

2

preprint

Figure 1: STMotif Explorer Architecture (a); STMotifDS Data Structure (b)

MotifPositions, and other information regarding each motif MotifInformation. This information is related to the result
of the processing by the algorithm (such as the distance among the occurrences and entropy). Besides these, it is
composed of the GenericInformation field, where information used by the algorithm is stored (such as the parameters
and dataset reference). The structure is summarized in Figure 1.b.

Register Datasets. An important task for verifying and validating an approach is execution across multiple domains.
Users can also register new spatiotemporal datasets that can be used in the execution of registered algorithms through
the interface. Besides, it is possible to register files containing the results of other algorithms and with the ground
truth results, which can be used through the interface. These files are in RData format and follow the canonical data
structure STMotifDS. All files need to be registered, with their signature of the functions, in the file CONFIG.xml to
become available by the tool.

3.2 STMotif Explorer: Interface

The graphical web-based interface (depicted in Figure 2), also implemented in R and JavaScript, provides how users
can run the register algorithms and interact with the data. It has options to run motif discovery algorithms (Run Motif
Identification component). After execution, the Load/Save STMD component is invoked to store the results within the
system architecture.

Figure 2: Screenshots of STMotif Explorer API and user interface

Through Exploration features, the user can interact with the processing results. These features provide data visualiza-
tion and a panel with updated dynamic information as iterations with the data. The user can view (i) the spatiotemporal
dataset (Spatial-Temporal Exploration); (ii) the complete set of discovered motifs, with all their occurrences (STMD
Exploration); (iii) only one motif and its occurrences distributed by the data; (iv) a region of space and time, with the
occurrences contained therein. Finally, the tool enables the comparison of results from different approaches in a single
space providing visual and statistical information about the data (Compare Ground Truth).

3

preprint

4 Demonstration Scenario

This section presents the entire process of applying STMotif Explorer in identifying, ranking, and visualizing spa-
tiotemporal motifs in scenarios with real data. Our cases also present the flexibility of the tool, which enables the
inclusion of new motif discovery and ranking functions. Also, we present visualization and analysis scenarios of the
discovered motifs, comparing different approaches applied in the same domain. This demo uses the seismic spatial-
time dataset [3]. STMotif Explorer has open source code and a demonstration video that can be obtained through the
GitHub repository1.

Scenario 1: API. In this scenario, we present the modularity of the tool by receiving new functions and data. Figure
2A presents an example of the MPMoti f Discovery() function written in the R language for motif discovery. This
function uses the TSMP R package [1], which implements the Matrix Profile [12]. The Matrix Profile (MP) approach
is based on computing the distance of a sequence with the most similar subsequence present in the time series. Two
other functions are already provided by the architecture, one for STMD, S earchS T Moti f () and the RankS T Moti f ()
ranking function, both using the STMotif R Package, which reflects the CS A approach [2]. Then the ground truth
results of the seismic dataset motifs are recorded to compare the results.

Scenario 2: Run Motif discovery. Once the functions and datasets are registered, the user can use the functionalities
available in the interface to execute the algorithms. Figure 2B shows the menu to select the dataset, the STMD, and
ranking functions. When the user selects the approach to be executed, fields for the parameter values are presented.
In this scenario, we execute the CS A approach using the default parameter values defined in the API. It uses the
RankS T Moti f () ranking function with the seismic dataset. At the end of execution, the tool informs the user about
the end of the process. It saves the results in the architecture in an RData format file, following the canonical data
structure, and is now available for use in the other features.

Scenario 3: Data Visualization. Figure 2C shows the arrangement of occurrences of the discovered motifs. The user
also can iterate with the data at different levels of detail by magnifying the image. It is possible to select a region of
space and view only the motifs found in this area. In the menu shown in Figure 2D, the discovered motifs are listed,
and sorted according to the previous ranking, starting with the best ranking. Each motif represents a set of the same
occurrences and is presented in a different color. The user can select a subset of motifs to view through this menu. We
choose the information related to the best-ranked motif, its occurrences, and its signal in the space-time series (Figure
2E).
Scenario 4: Comparison. It offers users a tool to compare the results of different approaches and the result of one
approach with its corresponding ground truth (Figure 2F). To obtain the result of the MP approach, we performed the
motif discovery process of the MPMotifDiscovery function. Then, we compare it with the ground truth. Users can
check that the approach is inaccurate, given the statistical results presented in the information table, even with many
occurrences discovered. The visualization analysis confirms this argument since it even returns multiple occurrences.
They are visibly distant from the correct occurrences.

5 Conclusion

This paper introduces a Spatial-Temporal Motif Visualization tool, the STMotif Explorer, that effectively addresses the
gap of visualized constrained space-time motifs. It provides a comprehensive system for interactive discovery, visual-
ization, and comparative analysis of motifs. The tool enables filtering and ranking of motifs during the visualization
and provides ways to explore motifs with ground truth data. This feature helps researchers and practitioners evaluate
different algorithms and the quality of discovered motifs in various domains.

Acknowledgements

The authors thank CNPq, CAPES, and FAPERJ for partially sponsoring this research.

References

[1] F. Bischoff and P. Rodrigues. tsmp: An R Package for Time Series with Matrix Profile. R Journal, 12(1):76–86,

2020.

1Available at https://github.com/cefet-rj-dal/STMotifexplorer.

4

[2] H. Borges, M. Dutra, A. Bazaz, R. Coutinho, F. Perosi, F. Porto, F. Masseglia, E. Pacitti, and E. Ogasawara.

Spatial-time motifs discovery. Intelligent Data Analysis, 24(5):1121–1140, 2020.

preprint

[3] dgbes.

https://opendtect.org/osr/Main/NetherlandsOffshoreF3BlockComplete4GB, 2018.

Netherlands

Offshore

F3

Block

-

Complete.

Technical

report,

[4] P. Eichmann, N. Tatbul, F. Solleza, and S. Zdonik. Visual exploration of time series anomalies with metro-viz. In
Proceedings of the ACM SIGMOD International Conference on Management of Data, pages 1901–1904, 2019.
[5] J. Lin, E. Keogh, S. Lonardi, J. P. Lankford, and D. M. Nystrom. VizTree: a tool for visually mining and
monitoring massive time series databases. In Proceedings of the Thirtieth international conference on Very large
data bases - Volume 30, VLDB ’04, pages 1269–1272, Toronto, Canada, aug 2004. VLDB Endowment.

[6] M. Linardi, Y. Zhu, T. Palpanas, and E. Keogh. Matrix profile goes MAD: variable-length motif and discord

discovery in data series. Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, 34(4):1022–1071, 2020.

[7] T. Oates, A. Boedihardjo, J. Lin, C. Chen, S. Frankenstein, and S. Gandhi. Motif discovery in spatial trajectories
using grammar inference. In International Conference on Information and Knowledge Management, Proceed-
ings, pages 1465–1468, 2013.

[8] E. Ramanujam and S. Padmavathi. Comprehensive review on time series motif discovery using evolutionary

techniques. International Journal of Advanced Intelligence Paradigms, 23(1-2):155–170, 2022.

[9] P. Senin, J. Lin, X. Wang, T. Oates, S. Gandhi, A. Boedihardjo, C. Chen, S. Frankenstein, and M. Lerner.
GrammarViz 2.0: A tool for grammar-based pattern discovery in time series. Lecture Notes in Computer Sci-
ence (including subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics), 8726
LNAI(PART 3):468–472, 2014.

[10] S. Shekhar, S. Feiner, and W. Aref. Spatial computing. Communications of the ACM, 59(1):72–81, 2016.
[11] S. Torkamani and V. Lohweg. Survey on time series motif discovery. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Data

Mining and Knowledge Discovery, 7(2), 2017.

[12] C.-C. Yeh, Y. Zhu, L. Ulanova, N. Begum, Y. Ding, H. Dau, Z. Zimmerman, D. Silva, A. Mueen, and E. Keogh.
Time series joins, motifs, discords and shapelets: a unifying view that exploits the matrix profile. Data Mining
and Knowledge Discovery, 32(1):83–123, 2018.

5

