Analysis of Term Reuse, Term Overlap and Extracted
Mappings across AgroPortal Semantic Resources
Amir Laadhar, Elcio Abrahão, Clement Jonquet

To cite this version:

Amir Laadhar, Elcio Abrahão, Clement Jonquet. Analysis of Term Reuse, Term Overlap and Ex-
tracted Mappings across AgroPortal Semantic Resources. EKAW 2020 - 22nd International Conference
on Knowledge Engineering and Knowledge Management, Sep 2020, Bozen-Bolzano, Italy. pp.71-87,
￿10.1007/978-3-030-61244-3_5￿. ￿lirmm-02945172￿

HAL Id: lirmm-02945172

https://hal-lirmm.ccsd.cnrs.fr/lirmm-02945172

Submitted on 22 Sep 2020

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

Analysis of Term Reuse, Term Overlap and
Extracted Mappings across AgroPortal Semantic
Resources

Amir Laadhar, Elcio Abrah˜ao[0000−0001−7983−2253], and
Clement Jonquet[0000−0002−2404−1582]

Laboratory of Informatics, Robotics and Microelectronics of Montpellier (LIRMM),
University of Montpellier & CNRS, France
firstname.lastname@lirmm.fr

Abstract. Ontologies in agronomy facilitate data integration, informa-
tion exchange, search and query of agronomic data, and other knowledge-
intensive tasks. We have developed AgroPortal, an open community-
based repository of agronomy and related domains semantic resources.
From a corpus of ontologies, terminologies, and thesauri taken from Agro-
Portal, we have generated, extracted and analyzed more than 400,000
mappings between concepts based on: (i) reuse of the same URI be-
tween concepts in diﬀerent resources –term reuse; (ii) lexical similarity
of concept names and synonyms –term overlap; and (iii) declared map-
pings properties between concepts –extracted mappings. We developed
an interactive visualization of each mapping construct separately and
combined which helps users identify most prominent ontologies, relevant
thematic clusters, areas of a domain that are not well covered, and per-
tinent ontologies as background knowledge. By comparing the size of
the semantic resources to the number of their mappings, we found that
most of them have under 5% of their terms mapped. Our results show
the need of an ontology alignment framework in AgroPortal where map-
pings between semantic resources will be assembled, compared, analysed
and automatically updated when semantic resources evolve.

Keywords: Ontology alignment · Term reuse · Term overlap · Extracted
mappings · Mapping analysis · Visualization

1

Introduction

By reusing the NCBO BioPortal technology [16], we have designed AgroPortal
(http://agroportal.lirmm.fr), an ontology repository for agronomy, plant
and food sciences and originally biodiversity-ecology [9]. As of August 2020,
AgroPortal includes 126 ontologies, terminologies and thesauri encoded in dif-
ferent formats like RDFS, OWL, OBO, UMLS-RRF and SKOS. AgroPortal
stores reference resources such as the Plant Ontology or Agronomy Ontology
or AGROVOC. The need for interconnecting these resources i.e., ontology align-
ment [3], has been explicitly expressed by almost all of our partners and collab-
orators to achieve interoperability among their semantic resources. But the need

2

A. Laadhar et al.

goes beyond the sole ability to automatically generate alignment between ontolo-
gies, it includes being able to store, compare, evaluate the mappings. Therefore,
AgroPortal oﬀers a mapping repository to store mappings between its semantic
resources. To build this mapping repository, we currently consider three map-
pings constructs:1 term reuse, term overlap and extracted mappings. By term
reuse, we mean the situation in which a term of an ontology is explicitly reused
inside another ontology using the same URI.2 Term reuse is a good practice in
ontology/terminology development as it facilitates semantic interoperability and
reduce ontology engineering eﬀorts [1]. However, for many reasons, it is not a
common practice when semantic resources are not developed under the same
umbrella or by the same group or simply when an ontology developer likes to
add statements to an object which he/she does not want to conﬂict with state-
ments in other ontologies. By term overlap, we mean the situation in which
two classes/concepts use the same labels or synonyms in diﬀerent semantic re-
sources. Lexical matches are clearly known not to be fully reliable as semantic
mappings simply because of the polysemic aspects of labels. However, they are
also very well perceived as a useful and quick way of ﬁnding relevant similar con-
cepts/ontologies [5]. By extracted mapping, we mean being able to extract and
load in the repository mappings explicitly declared inside the ontology source
ﬁles (typically using owl:sameAs or SKOS mapping properties) to reify them
into ﬁrst-class objects with provenance information. Contrary to expectations,
the process of extracting mappings is not trivial considering the heterogeneity
of means to encode mappings and the predominant use of ambiguous constructs
like OBO XRefs for instance.

AgroPortal’s mapping repository is valuable to our community, since it al-
lows ontology developers and users to identify similar terms across ontologies
and it facilitates data integration in systems relying on diﬀerent semantic re-
sources. Mappings help the identiﬁcation of prominent ontologies that can serve
as a common denominator or hub for data interoperability. If AgroPortal easily
detects term reuse between ontologies, the identiﬁcation of correct term over-
lap is harder because of polysemic labels and can bring to incoherences [4, 17].
However, these “overlaps” are very useful as they can be used by developers
to identify similar or equivalent terms to manually enrich their ontologies by
declaring formal and rigorous mappings. Today, term reuse and term overlap
are automatically detected by AgroPortal when an ontology is uploaded. How-
ever, we are currently working to automate mapping extraction from ﬁles during
the ontology parsing routine.

In this article, we present an analysis of the mapping repository on a corpus
of 109 ontologies built from AgroPortal’s content in March 2020. Such analysis
of the mappings between semantic resources is important as it tells us about the

1 We prefer here the term “construct” to “type” which is used in our work with another

meaning: to quality the mapping (exact match, close match, same as, etc.).

2 The most frequent case of reuse concern classes/concepts, however any object iden-
tiﬁed by an URI can be reused from one semantic resource to the other (e.g.,
owl:Class, owl:Individual, rdfs:Property, skos:Concept).

Mappings Analysis across AgroPortal Semantic Resources

3

landscape of semantic resources, the structure of the ontology repository, and
the ways mappings can help in the process of ontology design and evaluation.
The contributions of this work are the following:

– A dataset of multiple mappings constructs between semantic resources in

agronomy and related domains which is in large part curated;

– An openly available tool called Ontology Mapping Harvester Tool (OMHT),
which automatically extracts mappings declared inside ontology source ﬁles
and represent them into classic mapping formats;

– An interactive visualization of the mapping dataset to display mapping con-

structs individually and combined;

– A descriptive analysis for each mapping construct.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows: the next section presents related
work. In Section 3, we introduce the methodology used for each of the three
mapping constructs for the generation the mappings dataset. In Section 4, we
describe the analysis and introduce the visualization. Finally, in section 5, we
discuss our results and conclude in Section 6.

2 Related Work

Ontology alignment is a key aspect for ontologies: it makes them more interop-
erable and interconnect the ones on overlapping domain of interests [3]. There is
lack of reference mapping repositories that would serve mappings as FAIR data
[21]. Such mappings repositories should support representation, extraction, har-
vesting, generation, validation, merging, evaluation, visualization, storage and
retrieval of mappings between the ontologies they host and other ones [8].

Mappings are handled diﬀerently within ontology repositories: Ontohub[19],
for instance, allows browsing, searching, and aligning ontologies. To the best
of our knowledge, only the repositories in the OntoPortal family3 oﬀers an in-
tegrated mapping repository, where diﬀerent kind of mappings are stored with
provenance and are accessible (read/write) through the user interface or via API
calls. BioPortal [16] automatically detects term reuse and generates term overlap
mappings (with a method called LOOM [5]), however, the technology does not
embed any state-of-the-art automatic ontology matching systems and does not
extract mappings declared inside the ontologies to reify them inside the mapping
repository. Other initiatives, such as the UMLS Metathesaurus includes a spe-
ciﬁc table to store mappings between the medical terminologies (MRMAP). The
European Bioinformatics Institute develops OxO (Ontology Xref Service) to vi-
sualize cross-references mappings (i.e., declared with the oboInOwl:hasDbXref
property) extracted from ontologies inside the Ontology Lookup Service [10]. To
disambiguate the preﬁx of XRefs targets and identify data sources, OxO uses
Identiﬁers.org, the OBO Library, and Preﬁxcommons.org. Whereas in our work,

3 The NCBO BioPortal technology can be reused and customized for deploying other
ontology repositories e.g., AgroPortal or EcoPortal. Since 2019, the generic technol-
ogy is branded as OntoPortal (https://ontoportal.org)

4

A. Laadhar et al.

we semi-automatically curate the declared cross-references to keep only explicit
valid mappings between ontology terms [13].

Mapping repositories are useful for several applications such as modules ex-
traction, ontology partitioning, ontology alignment using background knowledge
resources and mappings visualization. For instances: Amina et al. [2] proposed
a background knowledge-based ontology matching system using as background
knowledge a graph, build-out of external mappings, to interconnect the source
and target ontologies and identify mapping candidates. Ghazvinian et al. [6]
used mappings to extract modules from large ontologies. The YAM++ ontol-
ogy matching system [15] deﬁned a machine learning classiﬁer trained on a set
of reference external mappings. Kamdar et al. [12] proposed a visualization for
mappings extracted from BioPortal but it was not maintained in sync with the
ontology repository after publication.

Similar mappings analysis work to the one presented in this article are: In
2009, Ghazvinian et al. [7] analyzed more than four million term overlap map-
pings between 200 ontologies or terminologies in BioPortal (including 67 termi-
nologies from the UMLS Metathesaurus). The mappings were generated with
a simple lexical matching method to identify classes with same labels preferred
terms and synonyms, over normalised strings. Although their approach was tech-
nically simple, they have demonstrated the value of the mappings extracted [5].
They performed term overlap analysis to learn more about the characteristics
of the ontologies and the relationships between them e.g., identify hubs and
clusters over the ontologies. They used network analysis methods to answer
practical questions and to reason about the distribution of mappings among the
ontologies. In 2012, Poveda et al. [18] analyzed the landscape of reuses in the
196 semantic resources included in the Linked Open Vocabularies (LOV) reg-
istry[20]. In 2015, Kamdar et al.[11] investigated term reuse and overlap in 377
biomedical ontologies from BioPortal. However, in this study, XRef mappings
were mixed with other term reuses whereas in our work we distinguish them
and consider them as extracted mappings. The authors highlighted the need for
a sophisticated term recommendation mechanisms that support consistent term
reuse. Later, the authors extend their study to 509 ontologies in BioPortal and
reported a term reuse of 9% and a term overlap of 22.23% [12].

3 Methodology: Mapping Dataset Creation

We used for this study a set of 109 distinct agri-food and biodiversity-ecology se-
mantic resources, hosted in AgroPortal in March 2020. These semantic resources
include 9 ontologies in the OBO format (e.g., SOY, GR-TAX), 88 OWL ontolo-
gies (e.g., FOODON, ATOL), 10 SKOS thesauri (e.g., AGROVOC, NALT). 103
and 104 semantic resources (95%) show respectively term reuse and overlap; 28
semantic resources (25,68%) contain declared mappings in their source ﬁles.

In AgroPortal, term overlap and reuses are automatically detected but the
system does not explicitly materialize these mappings with provenance and a

Mappings Analysis across AgroPortal Semantic Resources

5

mapping relation.4 However, when we build our corpus, we represent these map-
pings as any other mappings in the repository and assign them provenance infor-
mation and relevant relations: owl:sameAs for term reuse and skos:relatedMatch
for term overlap. Indeed, skos:relatedMatch is in SKOS the “weaker” map-
ping relation which is appropriate, we believe, for non-curated lexical mappings
even if in some case skos:exactMatch or skos:closeMatch would be more ap-
propriate. Extracted mappings already have a mapping property chosen by the
ontology developer when he/she created the mapping. In our dataset, each map-
ping is also described with some metadata information using a BioPortal speciﬁc
JSON mapping format e.g., creation date, creator/tool, comment. More detail
about the creation of our dataset is provided in the next subsections.

We consider term overlap mappings as symmetric because when there is a
match between two labels of two diﬀerent ontologies, this match is independent
of the source and target ontologies. Therefore, term overlap mappings are bi-
directional. Even if the URI of the mapped entity is the same, we do not consider
term reuse mappings symmetric since they explicitly state that an ontology
reuses another one but not the other way around. Therefore, term reuse mappings
are unidirectional. Similarly, extracted mappings can be considered symmetric
or not depending on their semantics; but in this study, those mappings are being
explicitly declared in one ontology source ﬁle and not necessarily in the other,
we thus consider them unidirectional.

3.1 Term Reuse Mappings Harvesting

We deﬁne term reuse as the situation in which an URI from one ontology is
explicitly reused inside another ontology. This situation occurs when the de-
velopers of semantic resources decide to rely on knowledge described in other
resources. It increases the reusability between ontologies and reduces develop-
ment time and the proliferation of equivalent terms. A developer can either
decide to reuse speciﬁc terms one by one by simply identifying them with their
URIs in a statement or by (re)declaring them locally using the original URI. Or
he/she can import all the objects and statements of an ontology (or ontology
module) into another one. The later is only possible with OWL ontologies using
the construct owl:imports. Ontology developers typically use this construct to
import ontology modules. Among 88 OWL ontologies, we found 15 of them that
use owl:imports. For instance, the Food Ontology (FOODON) imports some
modules from ENVO or ChEBI. The imported modules may themselves contain
any kind of mappings like term overlap, term reuse and extracted mappings.
Therefore, we include the set of imported mappings in our mappings dataset.

We obtain term reuse mappings from AgroPortal’s REST API.5 AgroPor-
tal creates mappings between any two classes or concepts explicitly declared or
imported from one ontology to another using the same URI. Those “same URI

4 See https://github.com/agroportal/documentation/wiki/Mappings for details.
5 E.g., the following call returns all the mappings between the Agronomy and Plant
Ontology: http://data.agroportal.lirmm.fr/mappings?ontologies=AGRO,PO

6

A. Laadhar et al.

mappings” are not materialized in the repository but generated on-the-ﬂy. Sev-
eral ontologies (especially in the OBO community) reuse multiple terms from
one another, thus, from all these “same URI mappings”, we keep only the ones
corresponding to direct reuses from one ontology to the other. For example,
AGRO’s term “life of whole plant stage” originally deﬁned in the Plant On-
tology (PO:0025337) is same URI-mapped in AgroPortal to any other ontology
using this term (e.g., PO, FLOPO, ENVO), however, we only retain as a term
reuse the AGRO-PO, FLOPO-PO, ENVO-PO mappings. In addition, when an
ontology reuses a term from another ontology, not in our corpus, we ignore this
reuse. From our corpus of ontologies, we harvested a total of 16,958 term reuse
mappings (over a total of more than 53,000 “same URI mappings”).

3.2 Term Overlap Mappings Harvesting

We deﬁne term overlap as the situation in which two terms use the same labels
or synonyms in diﬀerent semantic resources. LOOM is an automatic ontology
matching system [5] implemented in the OntoPortal technology –thus available
in AgroPortal– to generate lexical matches between all the semantic resources
independently of their original formats. To identify the correspondences, LOOM
compares preferred names and synonyms of the terms in source and target on-
tologies and create a match, if and only if their labels are equal based on a
modiﬁed-string comparison function. The tool ﬁrst removes all delimiters from
both strings (e.g., spaces, underscores, parentheses, etc.) and the accents. Then
it uses an approximate matching technique to compare the strings, allowing for
a mismatch of at most one character in strings with length greater than four
and no mismatches for shorter strings.

We also obtain term overlap mappings from AgroPortal’s REST API. Those
“LOOM mappings” are also not materialized in the repository but generated
on-the-ﬂy. In AgroPortal, term overlaps are identiﬁed for any terms, being it
reused from another ontology or not. Thus, from all these “LOOM mappings”,
we remove the ones corresponding to direct reuses from one ontology to the
other. For example, AGRO’s term “life of whole plant stage” originally deﬁned in
the Plant Ontology (PO:0025337) is Loom-mapped in AgroPortal to any other
ontology using the same label (e.g., PO, FLOPO, ENVO), however, we only
retain as a term overlap the AGRO-FLOPO, AGRO-ENVO and FLOPO-ENVO
mappings. From our corpus of ontologies, we harvested a total of 246,348 term
overlap mappings. Due to the large size of the harvested tern overlap mappings,
we did not curate these mappings.

3.3 Extracted Mappings Harvesting

We mean by extracted mapping the ones explicitly declared inside the ontology
source ﬁles and extracted to be to reiﬁed into a ﬁrst-class objects with prove-
nance information in a mapping repository or in our case included in our dataset.
Extracted mappings are very valuable as they are usually manually created or
curated by the ontology developers and because they are semantically well de-
scribed with an explicit mapping property. Therefore, there is an obvious need

Mappings Analysis across AgroPortal Semantic Resources

7

to make these mappings available to the community in a repository, avoiding
external users the burden of extracting them ontology per ontology.

We have extracted the declared mappings from the source ﬁles using OMHT6,
developed as a standalone Java program that works with one ontology source ﬁle
pulled out from an ontology repository. The standard properties used by OMHT
to identify declared mappings inside a source ﬁle are the following: owl:sameAs,
oboInOwl:hasDbXref, SKOS mapping properties and optionally rdfs:seeAlso.
OMHT processes semantic resources in XML/RDF syntax an relies on the on-
tology repository to deal with diﬀerent representation languages. OMHT takes
as input a set of AgroPortal ontology acronyms and returns a JSON ﬁle for
each input ontology that stores extracted mappings along with their metadata.
Sometime, the target ontology and term are not explicit (especially with OBO
XRefs which do not use URIs) therefore, OMHT relies on a manually curated
ﬁle to resolve ambiguous targets.

In the dataset, we have removed extracted mappings for which source and
target ontology are the same e.g., AFO contains 421 oboInOwl:hasDbXRef map-
pings to concepts in the same ontology; similarly, PO contains 40 internal XRefs.
Surprisingly, this situation happens quite often: we have found a total of 2,230
such internal mappings all of them using the oboInOwl:hasDbXef property. The
use of oboInOwl:hasDbXRef for representing ontology mappings is controversial
as this property is used in the OBO community to capture several pieces of infor-
mation including mappings between ontologies e.g., cross-references to database
or database entries, curators of terms, references to publications, etc. In this
study, we have carefully curated only the XRefs that correspond to ontology
mappings (11% of them) to build our corpus as explained in another publica-
tion [13]. For instance, we have excluded XRefs to URLs or databases. Finally,
we distinguish internal, inter-portal, and external mappings respectively if the
target ontology is in AgroPortal, another repository of the OntoPortal family or
simply identiﬁed by its URI.

3.4 Final Mapping Dataset

The total number of mappings of this dataset is 444,496 as described by Figure
1 (left). Term reuse and term overlap mappings represent (59,2%) of the total
number of mappings, whereas explicit usage of mapping properties inside the
ontology source ﬁles represent 40,8%.7 Figure 1 (right) represents the overlap
between the three mappings constructs. This diagram shows also the number of
unique mappings for each mapping construct. We found two sets of 1,278 and
49,563 of overlapping mappings, which represent 11,43% of the dataset. The
ﬁrst intersection is an uncommon and odd situation where ontology developers
have declared an explicit mapping to a class being explicitly reused. The second
intersection is more interesting: it shows how much the number of lexical match in
our corpus are explicitly identiﬁed as declared mappings by ontology developers.
One would like to see this intersection grows.

6 https://github.com/agroportal/ontology_mapping_harvester
7 Our mapping dataset is publicly available at https://bit.ly/3gFJ2DD.

8

A. Laadhar et al.

Fig. 1. Number of mappings (left). Venn diagram of the mapping dataset (right).

4 Mapping Dataset Analysis

Our goal in this study is to investigate the occurrence of patterns from the
collected mappings. Therefore, we have built several mapping graphs that repre-
sent semantic resources and their alignments (i.e., set of mappings) respectively
as nodes and edges. We can visualize these graphs based on the percentage of
alignment, as described hereafter and provide an individual and a combined vi-
sualization for each mapping construct. Thus, we can identify hubs and clusters
of semantic resources in our dataset. We expect such visualization will help on-
tology developers to better understand the ontology landscape in their domain
of interest and possibly improve their semantic resources.

Similar to Ghazvinian et al. [7] percent-normalized link, we compute the
percentage of mappings P by dividing the number of mappings M between a
pair of ontologies Os and Ot by the total number of concepts |Vs| of the source
ontology based on the following formula: P = |M(Os, Ot)| / |Vs|. For instance,
if an ontology O1 has 1000 terms, and 500 of these terms are mapped to terms
in an ontology O2, then P(O1 O2) = 50%. If one ontology is much larger than
another, a large fraction of the small ontology may be mapped to the large one,
but the set of mappings still constitutes a small percentage of the large ontology.
This formula helps to investigate the level of mappings compared to the size of
source ontologies.

4.1 Term Reuse Analysis

Out of a total number of 3,725,495 declared classes or concepts in our corpus,
we found 16,958 term reuse mappings, with an average percentage P of 18,28%
between pairs of semantic resources where at least one URI was explicitly shared
between at least a pair of semantic resources. Out of 109 AgroPortal resources,
39 do not reuse any term from another ontology in the corpus which means that
70 does; but the number of distinct pairs of semantic resources is 174, which is
quite low. The percentage of reuse is mostly under 5%, however, we found 42
pairs of ontologies with a term reuse above 10% and 8 pairs exhibit term reuse

Mappings Analysis across AgroPortal Semantic Resources

9

between 95% and 100% which illustrates a situation where an ontology almost
completely reuse another one.

Fig. 2. The three mappings construct with diﬀerent values of P, arrows read as “is
mapped to”. Thickness of nodes and edges are respectively proportional to the sizes
of the semantic resources and the percentage of mappings between them. Row 1: term
reuse; Row 2: term overlap; Row 3: extracted mappings.

Figure 2’s raw 1 represents the term reuse graphs at diﬀerent percentages.
In other words, we display an arrow between a pair of semantic resources, if at
least P% of the source is reused in the target e.g., terms from BFO are being
reused within ENVO. We can conclude from Figure 2: (1) In the family of on-
tologies relying on the Basic Formal Ontology (BFO) upper level ontology –a
total of 17 in our corpus– we distinguish important diﬀerences in the degree of
reuses: from 2,77% (for CDAO) to 97,77% (for FOODON). (2) Some ontolo-
gies within the same area or build by the same group highly reuse one another
e.g., the Plant Ontology (PO), Plant Trait Ontology (TO), Plant Experimental
Conditions Ontology (PECO) and Plant Environment Ontology (EO) all devel-
oped in the Planteome project form a cluster. (3) Some ontologies are mostly
built from reuse e.g., PECO reuses all the URIs of EO. (4) We can visualize
diﬀerent clusters often built around reference upper level ontologies (BFO) or

10

A. Laadhar et al.

reference standards (SSN or PO). Diﬀerent values of P lead to diﬀerent clusters.
For instance, at P=20%, we can distinguish a cluster around the SSN ontol-
ogy being reused by a number of ontologies such as CASO and SOSA. (5) We
only ﬁnd term reuses in OBO and OWL ontologies. These ontologies tend to
reuse URIs from each other as encouraged for instance by the OBO principles.
However SKOS vocabularies or reference thesauri tend to systematically declare
their own URIs and use mapping properties to align with the other ontologies.

4.2 Term Overlap Analysis

We found a total of 246,348 term overlap mappings between the 109 seman-
tic resources of our corpus. With related ontologies, a small number of term
overlap is very common: 6,204 pairs have at least one term overlap and only
12 semantic resources did not have any term overlap with any other ones in
the corpus. Therefore, there is good lexical similarity in our dataset, even if the
majority of the pairs contains less than 5% of term overlap with an average of
2.05%. We found 98 pair of semantic resources having a term overlap percentage
more than 10%. Figure 2’s raw 2 represents the term overlap graphs at diﬀerent
percentages. For example, there is 51 806 term overlap between the Gramene
Taxonomy (GR-TAX) and NCBI Taxonomy. Figure 2 reveals other practices and
information about the ontologies in our corpus: (1) Some resources strongly over-
lap with other related ones, without explicitly using mappings properties e.g.,
TRIPHASE and ATOL. (2) Some resources are deﬁnitively about the same area
but have nothing to do one another with respect to community of developers,
common practices, or funding project. For instance, we can visualize at P= 20%
that BFO and the Semanticscience Integrated Ontology (SIO) are two upper
level ontologies developed for diﬀerent purposes and by diﬀerent communities
but unsurprisingly contains a certain level of overlap. The same observation can
be made for the Biological Collections Ontology (BCO) and the Darwin Core
vocabulary (DSW) which are two resources developed to facilitate biodiversity
data interoperability. (3) Term overlap allow us to discover cases where a the-
saurus relies on an upper level ontology but without explicitly reusing its objects.
For instance, the ANAEE Thesaurus’s design is inspired from OBOE but the
thesaurus being exclusively developed in SKOS cannot explicitly relies on OBOE
developed in OWL. We observe 38% term overlap between them. (4) At P=30%,
we visualize several clusters e.g., between FLOPO, TO and PEAO. This cluster
is visible for both term overlap and term reuse but through the PO hub in the
case of term reuse. Despite these strong connections, we will see after, that we
do not ﬁnd any usage of mapping properties between these ontologies.

4.3 Extracted Mappings Analysis

Out of 109 semantic resources, we found 81 (74,31%) do not declare any map-
pings. From the 28 other resources, we have extracted 181,189 mappings from
source ﬁles and found 174 pairs. Figure 1 (left) shows the majority of extracted
mappings are internal i.e., between AgroPortal resources, which tends to corrob-
orate the thematic coherence of the repository. 11% of these mappings pointing to

Mappings Analysis across AgroPortal Semantic Resources

11

target semantic resources in the NCBO BioPortal reveals the thematic proximity
with biology and life sciences (e.g., environment, nutrition). Among the impor-
tant targets in the NCBO BioPortal are the Foundational Model of Anatomy
(FMA) with 3,431 mappings or the ChEBI ontology with 745 mappings from 11
ontologies. External mappings target semantic resources that are not yet hosted
in an ontology repository which denotes: (i) the willingness of ontology develop-
ers to map to semantic resources beyond the original domain captured within an
ontology –this is a good practice for linked open data; (ii) integration of semantic
resources in domain-speciﬁc repositories is not over. Among the most important
external targets, we can cite 20,699 mappings from AGROVOC to the Chinese
Agricultural Thesaurus (CAT) not yet integrated in AgroPortal.

Figure 2 ’s raw 3 reveals practices and information about extracted map-
pings in our corpus: (1) Every important reference thesaurus in AgroPortal
(AGROVOC, ANNAETHES, NALT, GEMET) is strictly aligned to other ones
in the domain, which seems to be a better practice than for ontologies in the
wild. (2) Some semantic resources lexically very close (term overlap) are also
formally aligned, like the case of GR-TAX being aligned to NCBITAXON. In-
deed, when designed GR-TAX employed a lot of terms from NCBITAXON but
the developers have decided to create new URIs and declared mappings between
them. (3) At diﬀerent levels of P, we visualize some clusters diﬀerent from the
ones observed before e.g., around PO, a cluster is formed with diﬀerent ontologies
such as the TOP thesaurus which is developed by a diﬀerent project. (4) We can
observe a surprisingly low count of owl:sameAs in our dataset (3,255/181,189).
Whereas this property was originally proposed explicitly for mappings, its strong
logic entailment results in ontology developers not using it at the beneﬁt of SKOS
properties that do not have any logical entailment.

4.4 Combined Mappings Visualization and Analysis

Using an interactive visualization, we can see links between semantic resources
for any mapping constructs and identify prominent hubs and clusters with varia-
tion of P. It is available online with the ObservableHQ Web application: https:
//observablehq.com/@amirlad?tab=collections. Interested users can visual-
ize each mapping construct individually and combined and dynamically change
the percentage threshold. We believe, such visualization could be useful to on-
tology developers to select semantic resources for reuse or alignment.

Figure 3 (right) shows two hubs identiﬁed in our dataset: (i) PO, with map-
pings from and to 10 semantic resources; (ii) BFO, with terms being reused
by many ontologies. Based on the combined visualization in Figure 3 (left), we
can also visualize other prominent hubs. NCBITAXON, with a set of 59,186
mappings coming from 6 other semantic resources (PECO, TO, CL, FOODON,
GR-TAX, EO) counts for 47% of the total number of internal mappings in the
dataset. Figure 3 (left) depicts a combined graph at diﬀerent values of P for
each mapping construct. In this graph, we easily visualize several clusters and
how they involve diﬀerent constructs. For instance, we can visualize a 5-resource
cluster (SSN, SOSA, CASO, IRRIG, SAREF) in which a mix of term reuse

12

A. Laadhar et al.

and term overlap mappings interconnect the ontologies but no explicit declared
mappings. We can also visualize a cluster of ontologies around AGROVOC.

Fig. 3. (left) Combined graph of the three mapping constructs with P= 20% for term
reuse, P= 35% for term overlap and P= 10% for extracted mappings. (right) Plant
Ontology and Basic Formal Ontology hubs for all constructs at P=15%.

5 Discussion

Observations speciﬁc to ontologies in the OBO Foundry. For the 22
OBO Foundry ontologies in our corpus, there are 13,340 term reuses, 45,907
term overlaps mappings, and 2,799 extracted mappings. We found an average
term reuse percentage of 15,06% between 73 pairs of OBO Foundry ontologies.
Indeed, favoring term reuse is one principle of the OBO Foundry community. We
found an average term overlap percentage of 4,92% between 345 pairs of OBO
Foundry ontologies. In complement, we ﬁnd an average percentage of extracted
mappings of 1,73% between 48 pairs of OBO Foundry ontologies. Only two pairs
of ontologies exhibit a percentage over 10 %: EO-PO and EO-NCBITAXON
with respectively a percentage of 15,65% and 21,53%.

Observations speciﬁc to the Crop Ontology project. The Crop On-
tology project [14] counts 22 ontologies in our corpus. We did not ﬁnd any
term reuse or extracted mappings between them. However, these ontologies of-
ten rely on a set of terms, especially for upper-level entities, described in a
namespace that corresponds to no ontology e.g., http://www.cropontology.
org/rdf/Measurement. With the mapping visualization, at diﬀerent levels of
P, we can observe a term overlap cluster made by several of the ontologies in
the Crop Ontology projects. These ontologies deﬁne similar traits of diﬀerent
crops, so it is normal they display a strong overlap. We found a total of 31,368
term overlap mappings between 640 pairs with an average percentage of 3,85%.

Mappings Analysis across AgroPortal Semantic Resources

13

The term overlap percentage for the crop ontologies is slightly higher than the
term overlap percentage in the corpus. However, the crop ontologies are not well
reused or mapped by other ontologies in AgroPortal.

Observations speciﬁc to SKOS thesauri. Over 10 SKOS thesauri in our
corpus, we did not ﬁnd any term reuse mappings. We found 1,792 term overlap
mappings and 41,932 of extracted mappings which tend to say the thesauri do
not strongly overlap, even if they are well aligned with one another. There is an
average percentage of 1.05% of term overlap between 52 pairs of the 10 SKOS
thesauri of AgroPortal. We only found the use of mapping properties between
8 pairs with an average percentage of 10,35%. Reference thesauri developed by
large organizations (e.g., FAO, USDA) do not reuse URIs from other semantic
resources even if they overlap. But, they tend to declare explicit mappings using
the SKOS mappings property more than the rest of the semantic resources in
the corpus. For instance, AGROVOC, which is a controlled vocabulary covering
all areas of interest of the Food and Agriculture Organization, do not reuse any
terms from other semantic resources; however, it is explicitly aligned to GEMET
and NALT. Thesauri tend to develop their URIs rather than reusing other URIs
then aligning the copied terms to the original thesaurus. Unlike OBO Foundry
ontologies, there is a lack of collaborative eﬀort to develop SKOS thesauri that
employ the same terms. But, when mappings are explicitly declared, they are
well encoded and fully reusable as not in the XRefs, which are semantically
ambiguous and need to be curated.

To the best of our knowledge, there is no other analysis of mappings in the
domain covered by AgroPortal. However, in the following, we compare our results
to the three most relevant mapping analysis studies identiﬁed in the related work.

Analogy with Ghazvinian et al. 2009 [7]. They analyzed a set of 4 mil-
lion term overlap mappings for 207 biomedical ontologies stored in BioPortal and
UMLS. Their dataset contained more than 4 million concepts. Here, we stud-
ied term reuse mappings, term overlap mappings, and extracted mappings from
3,735,344 concepts of 109 ontologies stored in AgroPortal. The total number of
mappings is 444,496 with 246,348 term overlap mappings. We can deduce there
is less term overlap in agri-food ontologies than biomedical ontologies. Indeed,
Ghazvinian et al. reported that biomedical ontologies are very closely connected,
with 33% of them having at least half of their concepts mapped to concepts in
other ontologies. Whereas, in our dataset only 20 ontologies (18,34%) have at
least 50% of their terms mapped to terms in some other ontologies. Therefore,
there is less term overlap in our agronomy and biodiversity dataset than in the
biomedicine dataset. Ghazvinian et al. stated that in biomedicine there is a lit-
tle bit of overlap in everything, resulting in the extremely connected graph at
P=1%. At P=20%, however, they report a meaningful power-law distribution.
In our corpus, we visualize a similar observation for the term overlap mappings
construct. With 2268 ontology pairs at P=1% and 132 ontology pairs at P=20%.
However, for term reuse mappings and extracted mappings, the power-law dis-
tribution is lower than for term overlap mappings. For term reuse mappings, we
found 61 ontology pairs at P=1% and18 ontology pairs at P=20%. Dealing with

14

A. Laadhar et al.

extracted mappings, we found 68 ontology pairs at P=1%, and 18 at P=20%.
Ghazvinian et al. visualized only term overlap mappings, however in our case,
we can generate a combined visualization of the three mapping constructs. They
stated term overlap mappings can be employed to identify prominent ontologies
in a domain. This is true in our study too plus, the combination of the mapping
constructs helps to have a better overview of the existing prominent ontologies.
Analogy with Poveda et al. 2012 [18]. They reported a percentage of
40% of term reuse in 196 semantic resources in the Linked Open Vocabularies
(LOV) registry, which do not contain agri-food or biodiversity-ecology semantic
resources. This percentage is higher than the average percentage (18,28%) of
term reuse in AgroPortal ontologies.

Analogy with Kamdar et al. 2015 and 2017 [11, 12]. They ﬁrst re-
ported an average percentage of term overlap of 14.4% across 377 biomedical on-
tologies then in 2017, they reported a higher term overlap percentage (22.23%).
For 109 AgroPortal ontologies, we found an average term overlap percentage of
2.05%, which is much lower than reported for BioPortal. This is mostly due to
the method used to ﬁnd lexical similarity. With a lower threshold and with the
removal of stopwords, Kamdar et al.’s method keeps more term overlap map-
pings than LOOM (higher recall). However, our method can result in a better
precision, even if we acknowledge it has certain limitation: lexically-similar la-
bels in diﬀerent ontologies may represent totally diﬀerent concepts. Kamdar et
al. considered XRefs as term reuse mappings, however, they do not consider
other mapping properties. In our study, we extracted mappings with all the
mapping properties available in the ontologies (including XRefs) and kept for
term reuse only entities using the same URIs. This approach allows us to derive
better insights from our dataset. Similarly to Kamdar et al., we found that most
ontologies reuse less than 5% of their terms. This is contrary to the orthogonality
principle encouraged in ontology engineering [1].

6 Conclusions and Perspective

We have built and analyzed a dataset of three mapping constructs based on
a corpus of 109 semantic resources from AgroPortal. We have gathered more
than 400,000 mappings either generated from AgroPortal or contained in the
ontology source ﬁles. Our ﬁnding shows that most ontologies overlap with, reuse,
or map less than 5% of their terms to other ontologies. Some communities have
adopted certain good practices that it would be valuable to share with others.
For instance, term reuse is more common in ontologies from the OBO Foundry,
however the way these ontologies encode declared mappings is bad. On the other
hand, term reuse is nonexistent in reference to SKOS thesauri, however these
thesauri have a clear and consistent use of SKOS mapping properties for their
declared mappings.

Despite the recent promotion of the FAIR data principles [21], which apply
to semantic resources as any other data, some eﬀorts are still necessary to in-
terconnect them. Overall, ontology developers sometimes copy terms from other

Mappings Analysis across AgroPortal Semantic Resources

15

semantic resources or deﬁne terms without checking reusable ontologies –which
result in term overlap– or without explicitly reusing them or explicitly mapping
them to the source ontology. Coming back to Figure 1 (right), a better situation
would be to have a blue circle (term reuse) as big as possible, which would con-
sequently decrease the size of the orange circle (extracted mappings) in which
most of the green circle would be included (term overlap) making the yellow
intersection (overlap with explicitly declared mappings) much of it.

The main contribution of our paper is the analysis and the visualization of
these three mapping constructs which we hope will serve ontology developers
to improve their practices and build semantic resources that will be as much as
possible interoperable, reusable, and reused. This analysis can lead to relevant
insights on the characteristics of the mappings repository. Since the use of on-
tologies, thesauri, and taxonomies expands, this visualization and its analysis
can play an important role in understanding the relationships between semantic
resources, and to identify clusters and hubs. We hope that these ﬁndings will be
used to develop better guidelines, enhance term reuse and the use of mappings
properties, and minimize term overlap.

The number of ontologies in AgroPortal increase and they are constantly
updated. As future work, we plan to automate the analysis and visualization
of term reuse, term overlap, and extracted mappings directly in AgroPortal.
So that the subsequent version of the dataset used in this study could be au-
tomatically produced and exported from AgroPortal. We also plan to include
an analysis and visualization of mappings for each ontology in the repository,
which means that a developer will have an analysis, speciﬁc to his/her ontol-
ogy. We are currently working on a new ontology alignment framework inside
AgroPortal. This framework will contain a revised version of the ontology reposi-
tory which shall generate term overlap mappings, identify term reuse mappings,
extract declared mappings and also use external automatic matching systems
to generate new mappings. Then each source of mappings will be merged into
a unique alignment where each merged mappings will be scored and described
with provenance.

Acknowledgements

This work was achieved with support of the AGRO Labex (ANR-10-LABX-
0001), the NUMEV Labex (ANR-10-LABX-20) and the Data to Knowledge in
Agronomy and Biodiversity (D2KAB – www.d2kab.org) project that received
funding from the French National Research Agency (ANR-18-CE23-0017).

References

1. Amir Ghazvinian, Natalya F. Noy, M.A.M.: How orthogonal are the OBO Foundry

ontologies? Biomedical Semantics 2(2) (May 2011)

2. Annane, A., Bellahsene, Z., Azouaou, F., Jonquet, C.: Building an eﬀective and
eﬃcient background knowledge resource to enhance ontology matching. Web Se-
mantics 51, 51–68 (August 2018)

16

A. Laadhar et al.

3. Euzenat, J., Shvaiko, P.: Ontology matching, Second edition. Springer (2013)
4. Faria, D., Jim´enez-Ruiz, E., Pesquita, C., Santos, E., Couto, F.M.: Towards Anno-
tating Potential Incoherences in BioPortal Mappings. In: 13th Int. Semantic Web
Conf., ISWC’14. LNCS, vol. 8797, pp. 17–32. Riva del Garda, Italy (Oct 2014)
5. Ghazvinian, A., Noy, N.F., Musen, M.A.: Creating Mappings For Ontologies in
Biomedicine: Simple Methods Work. In: American Medical Informatics Association
Annual Symposium, AMIA’09. pp. 198–202. Washington, USA (Nov 2009)

6. Ghazvinian, A., Noy, N.F., Musen, M.A.: From mappings to modules: using map-
pings to identify domain-speciﬁc modules in large ontologies. In: 6th Int. Conf. on
Knowledge Capture, K-CAP’11. pp. 33–40. Banﬀ, Canada (June 2011)

7. Ghazvinian, A., Noy, N.F., Jonquet, C., Shah, N.H., Musen, M.A.: What Four Mil-
lion Mappings Can Tell You about Two Hundred Ontologies. In: 8th Int. Semantic
Web Conf., ISWC’09. LNCS, vol. 5823, pp. 229–242. Washington, USA (Nov 2009)
8. Jonquet, C.: Ontology Repository and Ontology-Based Services – Challenges, con-
tributions and applications to biomedicine & agronomy. HDR Manuscript, Univer-
sity of Montpellier, Montpellier, France (May 2019)

9. Jonquet, C., Toulet, A., et al.: AgroPortal: a vocabulary and ontology repository
for agronomy. Computers and Electronics in Agriculture pp. 126–143 (Jan 2018)
10. Jupp, S., Liener, T., Sarntivijai, S., Vrousgou, O., Burdett, T., Parkinson, H.: OxO
A Gravy of Ontology Mapping Extracts. In: 8th Int. Conf. on Biomedical Ontology,
ICBO’17. vol. 2137, p. 2. Newcastle, UK (2017)

11. Kamdar, M.R., Tudorache, T., Musen, M.A.: Investigating term reuse and overlap
in biomedical ontologies. 6th Int. Conf. on Biomedical Ontology, ICBO’15 (July
2015)

12. Kamdar, M.R., Tudorache, T., Musen, M.A.: A systematic analysis of term reuse
and term overlap across biomedical ontologies. Semantic web 8(6), 853–871 (2017)
13. Laadhar, A., Abrahao, E., Jonquet, C.: Investigating One Million XRefs in Thirthy
Ontologies from the OBO World. In: 11th Int. Conf. on Biomedical Ontologies,
ICBO’20. Bozen-Bolzano, Italy (Sept 2020)

14. Matteis, L., Chibon, P., et al.: Crop ontology: vocabulary for crop-related concepts.
In: 1st Int. Work. on Semantics for Biodiversity. pp. 37–46. Montpellier, France
(May 2013)

15. Ngo, D., Bellahsene, Z.: YAM++ : A Multi-strategy Based Approach for Ontology
Matching Task. In: 18th Int. Conf. on Knowledge Engineering and Knowledge
Management, EKAW’12. LNCS, vol. 7603, pp. 421–425. Galway, Irland (Oct 2012)
16. Noy, N.F., Shah, N.H., et al.: BioPortal: ontologies and integrated data resources

at the click of a mouse. Nucleic Acids Research pp. 170–173 (May 2009)

17. Pathak, J., Chute, C.G.: Debugging Mappings between Biomedical Ontologies:
Preliminary Results from the NCBO BioPortal Mapping Repository . In: Int. Conf.
on Biomedical Ontology. pp. 95–98. Buﬀalo, USA (July 2009)

18. Poveda Villal´on, M., Su´arez-Figueroa, M.C., G´omez-P´erez, A.: The landscape
of ontology reuse in linked data. Ontology Engineering in a Data-driven World,
OEDW’12) (Oct 2012)

19. Till, M., Kutz, O., Codescu, M.: Ontohub: A semantic repository for heteroge-
neous ontologies. In: Theory Day in Computer Science, DACS’14. p. 2. Bucharest,
Romania (Sept 2014)

20. Vandenbussche, P.Y., Atemezing, G.A., Poveda-Villal´on, M., Vatant, B.: Linked
Open Vocabularies (LOV): a gateway to reusable semantic vocabularies on the
Web. Semantic Web (2014)

21. Wilkinson, M.D., Dumontier, M., et al.: The FAIR Guiding Principles for scientiﬁc

data management and stewardship. Scientiﬁc Data 3 (March 2016)

